1 introduction members of the ethnic minority communities living in a typical contemporary city holda set of ethnic identities organized according to the ethnic groups to whichthey belong . from the viewpoint of an ethnic community member, theseidentities appear to be arranged in an inclusiveness exclusiveness hierarchy, gradedby finer to more general discrimination between the identities .
examples of such communities include britain s asian community, which is multidifferentiated in terms of nationality, country of origin, religion, caste, class, and language, and israel s arab minority, whose members are differentiated mainlyby national identity, religion, and extended family .
ethnic residential distributions in cities are the outcome of interactions between the residential preferences of individuals who hold ethnic sets that indicate membership invarious ethnic groups. the inclusiveness exclusiveness hierarchical organization of ethnic group identities also implies a hierarchy of the residential patterns displayed by ethnic groups, that is, spatial inclusion of the ethnic groups that occupy overlappingareas and spatial exclusion between the ethnic groups that occupy different even ifadjacent areas .
studies dealing with minority majority residential patterns , and ethnic residential patterns amongminority groups describe and explain the degree of segregation in these residential patterns as resulting from various factors, such as own group preferences, individual and institutional discrim ination, socioeconomic status, housing type, attitudes to neighbourhood diversityand job opportunities however, they largely ignore the organization and expressionhow ethnicity influences residential distributions an agent based simulation itzhak omer department of geography and human environment, the environmental simulation laboratory, telavivuniversity,telaviv69978,israel e mail omery post.tau.ac.il received 16 december 2004 in revised form 17 may 2005environment and planning b planning and design 2005, volume 32, pages 657 672 abstract. this paper deals with the influence of the organization of an agent s ethnic identities on ethnic residential patterns by extending the schelling model to include a further hierarchical level  that is, the agents ethnic identities are organized in a two level hierarchy . agent based simulation reveals that the residential pattern createdat given levels of ethnic residential distribution can also be a response to intolerance behaviour atanother level. the simulation experiments also show that these patterns can qualitatively changein response to different intensities of intolerance at both and or either level. however, as a result ofthe asymmetric nesting of agents ethnic identities and the tangible residential patterns subsequentlyestablished, top down and bottom up influences are generally displayed in the following form intol erance behaviour at the top level strengthens the segregation observed at the bottom level whereas intolerance behaviour at the bottom level tends to weaken the segregation observed at the top level.
this means that intolerance motivated segregation between a minority and a majority in a city tendsto strengthen segregation between ethnic subgroups within an ethnic minority community. con versely, mutual intolerance between ethnic subgroups within an ethnic minority tends to moderateresidential segregation between that minority community and the majority population. i suggest thatthese conclusions can be used empirically to evaluate the consequences of individual preferences forthe ethnic composition characterizing residential patterns.doi 10.1068 b31156of ethnicity in residential distributions. thus, the effect of preferences for ethnic neighbourhood composition and segregation on residential patterns has been exam ined without reference to the relationship between the hierarchic levels of those ethnic residential distributions.
i suggest that the reason for the lacuna may lie in the absence of a theoretical explanation of the implications of internal ethnic organization for ethnic residentialdistributions. for example, empirical evidence has been gathered for yaffo, an area intel aviv, indicating the simultaneous decrease in segregation between its arab andjewish community as well as between the religious subgroups comprising the arab community during the period 1955 95 . nevertheless, the derivation of clear conclusions from that correlation remains difficult. specifically, without understanding the relationship between the levels of residential distributionobserved, it is difficult to say whether the decrease in majority minority residentialsegregation has been influenced by the degree of segregation characterizing the subgroupsin the respective minority ethnic community.
the main theoretical explanation for the influence of preferences for ethnic composition on residential patterns is suggested by the schelling model of segregation. schelling assumed that groups of individuals live along a line or checkerboard andactivate own group preferences or discriminatory behaviour with regard to theirneighbourhood s composition. to satisfy their residential preferences, individualsleave their current neighbourhood if it does not have the required minimum popula tion of individuals belonging to their own membership group, for example, at least 1 3of my neighbours are like me . analysis of the spatial patterns emerging from individuals migration thus provides a tool for understanding the effect of individual residential preferences on residential distributions. the pioneering contribution ofschelling s model relates to its identification of the nonlinear or counterintuitiveeffect of discriminatory behaviour on the segregation observed. as schelling states, small incentives, almost imperceptible differentials, can lead to strikingly polarizedresults .
the schelling model has come to represent a theoretical framework for studies dealing with the role of ethnic preferences in residential choice and their effect on residential pattern. clark, who tested the schelling model with empirical data, pointsout that this model has provided a basic building block in our understanding ofpreferences, choices, and pattern . specifically, its theoretical conclusionabout the gap between own group preferences and their consequences in residentialsegregation has been supported by numerous studies . the implications of this phenomenon for neighbourhood ethnic composition have also been found salient for the interpretation of findings from empirical studies aimed at evaluating own group preferences and the feasibility of creatingintegrated areas or preventing ethnic enclave formation in cities . moreover, the robustness of the conclusions of theschelling model was tested in more realistic environments by changing the modelparameters for example, different neighbourhood size or range of vision . this revision of the schelling model led laurie and jaggi to the f ollowing conclusion contrary to popular belief, rather modest decreases in xenophobia and or preferences for one s own kind,when coupled with increased vision , can lead to stable and integrated neighbourhoods  .658 io m e rhowever, schelling s model relates to only one ethnic identity, observed at only one level of ethnic residential distribution. in this paper i use agent based simulation modelling to investigate the influence of the organization of an individual s multiple ethnic identities on the ethnic residential distribution emerging during internal migration within cities. for that purpose, the simulation model applied here includes agentswho hold more than one ethnic identity.
abs modelling of residential segregation was actually initiated with schelling s model and can be viewed as a computerized version of that model . in abs modelling we directly interpretindividual choices in terms of the agents tolerance for specific ethnic compositions. this allows us to explore the implications of our assumptions on the residential patterns that emerge accordingly at the macrolevel.
this modelling approach has been found to be a convenient tool for studying the dynamics of residential segregation and thus has been applied in many studies aimedat investigating the effects of demographic and behavioural parameters on this process. however, none of the studies performed has considered the effect of the organization of an individual s ethnic identities on residential distribution.considered from this perspective, the schelling model is extended in this paper toinclude agents who hold more than one ethnic identity.
the paper continues, in section 2, with a description of the simulation model.
section 3 presents the results of the examination the concluding section is a discussionof the results.
2 description of the simulation model the simulation model was constructed by means of obeus , the general abs environment developed in tel aviv university s environmental simulationlaboratory . following schelling, i consider an abstract city, with the model agents located in cellular space each cell can either be occupied byone agent or remain empty. the agents can change location by migrating their decisionabout where to reside depends on the properties of the agents living in their currentas well as potential destination neighbourhood.
the goal of the model is to investigate the implications of the organization of an individual s ethnic identities on ethnic residential dynamics. for that purpose, themodel simulates the migration of agents whose ethnic identities are organized ina two level hierarchy. in the model, each agent belongs to one of several groups  in the larger society in addition to one of several subgroups that make up an ethnic minority. the resulting residential patterns emerging in the simula tion enable examination of the reciprocities between the respective ethnic group and subgroup membership levels. the levels then contribute to the construction of a hierarchical ethnic residential distribution.
2.1 an agent s ethnic identities each agent in the model displays a set of ethnic identities. if the identity of agent ais characterized by a hierarchy that has two levels la and lb then the ethnic identity of ais represented as a , where aidesignates an ethnic group at the top level and bijdesignates an ethnic subgroup at the bottom level . in this case, the structure of ethnic identities is defined by two ethnic groups at the top level and four ethnic groups at the bottom level two subgroups within each group hence, ai2, and bij2.how ethnicity influences residential distributions 659given that structure, the corresponding hierarchical inclusion of spatial patterns can be described as a top level, defined as a two component residential pattern pa2,a n d a bottom level, defined as a four component residential pattern, pb2, obtained by dividing each of the upper level residential patterns, p1,p2, into two separate subpatterns p11,p12,a n d p21,p22, respectively.
this definition of residential distribution enables us to consider the hierarchy of residential patterns from two aspects. first, each level of the hierarchy maintainsinclusiveness exclusiveness relations between agents according to the scope of their actions. second, each of the hierarchy branches represents a specific agent s ethnic identities.
2.2 agents behavioural rules the patterns emerging from the model are the outcomes of individual behaviour andinteractions, which i now detail. at each time step of the simulation, an agent makestwo residential decisions . at the first substep, agent aevaluates his or her current location according to ethnic identity aiof upper level laand decides whether to stay or move to a new residence . this decision is based onintolerance criteria and neighbourhood ethnic composition . if the agent s current location is deemed suitable and the decision is to stay, agent aparticipates in a second substep and evaluates his or her current position according to ethnic identity b ij, of lower level lb. as assumed in this serial hierarchic search procedure of residential choice , at the second substep, agent ais indifferent to identity ai  hence, he or she refers to all level lbidentities in a similar fashion. if the decision is to stay at this stage as well, agent aremains in his or her location for the remainder of the time step. so, agent ais satisfied  if and only if the intolerance criteria are fulfilled at both hierarchical levels of his orher ethnic identity. should the intolerance criteria not be fulfilled at one or both ofthe hierarchical levels, agent awill decide to search for a more appropriate location.
agent awill then enter a new location according to a similar series of substeps if and only if the intolerance criteria at the new location are again fulfilled at both hierarchical levels, l aandlb.
the probability of leaving or occupying a location is based on dissonance ,d, between an agent s ethnic identities and the neighbourhood s ethnic identities. disso nance, which is calculated separately for each hierarchical level and at each time step, isdefined as the fraction of neighbours in agent a s neighbourhood whose identity differs city population a1 a2 b11 b12 b21 b22p1 p2 p11 p21 p12p22top level la bottom level lb figure 1. schematic illustration of a two level hierarchy of agents group and subgroup identities and the spatial expression of that hierarchy in full residential segregation.660 io m e rfrom a s identity. the probability pof leaving is calculated as linearly proportional to dissonance d, that is, p kd i call coefficient kthedegree of intolerance . i assume thatkis the same for each agent at a given hierarchical level the higher k, the stronger the agent s reaction to neighbourhood dissonance d. note that the probability of leaving a location as a result of dissonance at the upper level equals pl kada, and probability of leaving a location at the lower level is pl kbdb. the probability of occupying a location is, then, pe 1 kadaat the upper level and pe 1 kbdbat the lower level. agent atherefore decides whether to remain in his or her current location or search for a better location based on this probability at each time step.
evaluate location in each time step decide whether to occupy a vacancy according to pl no noyes yes decide whether to occupy a vacancy according to pl build list of potential locations  get next vacancy to check decide whether to occupy a vacancy according to pe decide whether to occupy a vacancy according to peno yes no yes increase failure to find suitable location, f f 1move to the new location no yes all vacancies checked  stay in current locationnext agent stay in current location figure 2. agent action loop, repeated at each time step.how ethnicity influences residential distributions 661if agent adecides to leave the current location, he or she applies to a list of potential locations that is constructed from all vacant locations at the current timestep . agent a randomly chooses vacancies from the list and evaluates the probability of occupying each. if adecides to move to one of the optional locations, his or her prior location is immediately added to the vacant locations list. should agent afail to find a suitable location from the list, aremains in the current location. a necessary condition for the simulation is that agents cannot leave the city.
2.3 simulation initialization the city area, represented by a 1006100grid cell, is initially empty. agents then enter the city the first to enter always locates in the centre cell. other agents follow the above behavioural rules within the emerging residential distribution they react to theirneighbours within a 363moore neighbourhood. the agents in migration rate per iteration equals 1 of the cells occupied at each iteration .the maximum number of occupied cells is limited to 90 of the total area of the city,that is, 1000 cells are always left empty. the size of agent a s potential locations list  constructed from the vacancies in the current time step equals 20.
the degree of segregation or concentration of the spatial patterns emerging during the simulation is measured at each time step by averaging neighbourhood dissonancedover all agents. stated differently, each agent looks for that fraction of his or her neighbours who display different identities within the moore neighbourhoods. the d values of all the agents at a given level are then averaged to one value, s, which represents the degree of segregation at the given level. thus, s aand sbdenote the segregation observed in the residential patterns at laandlb, respectively. the measure sallows us to refer to the degree of segregation of a residential pattern in a way similar to that in which agents within a simulation refer or react to their neighbourhood ethniccomposition.
3 residential pattern dynamics 3.1 the influence of one identity only top down and bottom up aggregation effect in order to examine the consequences of the nesting of an agent s ethnic identities, the model first simulates the residential dynamics of agents acting on one identity level only. at this stage, only two possible combinations can be realized level la active or level lb active . for that purpose, the degree of intolerance is varied at the active level although it always equals 0 at the passive level that is, when lais active, all agents are indifferent to lb, and when lbis active, they are indifferent to la. all the results were averaged over six runs.
figure 3 presents the residential patterns by specific intolerance values  observed at both levels. the results show that a hierarchy of identities resulting from actions taken at one level generates segregation at the other level. this means that thenesting of an agent s ethnic identities displays aggregation effects actions taken at agiven level have impacts on the other level and are realized through unintentionalaggregation.
however, bottom up and top down aggregation effects are expressed in different ways. as illustrated in figure 3 by the values of segregation degree and by images at selected points, the bottom up aggregation effect figure 3 is much more significant and comprehensive, entailing strong segregation, whereas the top downaggregation effect figure 3 is more moderate, as ob served in the narrow range of segregation values found at level l b. this difference results from662 io m e rthe inherent asymmetry of the nesting of the agents ethnic identities . this means that actions taken by agent aaccording to a bottom level identity a r e necessarily also taken by a top l evel identity but not vice versa. for example, an action taken by an agent with identity b11is necessarily also taken by an agent with identity a1 however, an agent with identity a1does not necessarily take an action which is taken by an agent with identity b11because this action could just as likely be taken by an individual with identity b12.
1.0 0.80.6 0.4 0.20.0segregation degree  0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 intolerance kainlalevel intolerance kbinlblevel  points represented in simulation imagessa sb   sa sb  top down aggregation effect  laactive ,lbinactive bottom up aggregation effect  lainactive ,lbactive  sa 0 96 la sa 0 48 lb sa 0 82 la sa 0 75 lb figure 3. aggregation effect between hierarchical levels of residential ethnic distribution. la active, lbinactive top down aggregation creates two groups from four subgroups lainactive, lbactive bottom up aggregation creates two groups from four subgroups. the simulation images illustrate the phenomena for k 0 8. the random distribution is characterized by sa 0 5and sb 0 25. a colour version of this figure can be viewed on the environment and planning website at http www.envplan.com misc b31156 . each group is represented by one colour blue or red each subgroup is represented by a different shade of the group s colour.how ethnicity influences residential distributions 663the nesting between agents identities also implies the physical nesting of the levels of the agents residential distribution bottom level patterns top level patterns  . as a result, in situations of bottom up influence figure 3 in which lbalone is active, the aggregation at ladirectly and fully depends on the intolerance effective atlb the observed segregation at level la, increases from 0.5 up to 1.0. in contrast, the top down influence figure 3 is only partialand depends on the random exposure between bottom level groups. in this case,segregation s bdepends, in effect, on the number of ethnic subgroups found in lb that belong to the same ethnic group at level la. because the ratio of the upper level to the lower level groups is 2 4, the expected segregation at level lbis exactly half of the expected segregation at level la sb 1 2sa.
the number of groups belonging to the different levels  determines the value of intolerance kthat promotes segregation at a given level.
at level lb, where four groups are included in the distribution, strong intolerance is needed to create a strong segregation effect alternatively, at level la, weak intolerance is sufficient for achieving strong segregation. as can be seen from figure 3, to obtains b 0 8, an intolerance value of 0.8 is needed whereas to obtain sa 0 8, only ka 0 3is needed. the reason for this phenomenon is quite simple when the number of groups in a given random residential distribution increases, the fraction ofneighbours belonging to the same group decreases. hence, to achieve the same result,agent a s reactions to the other groups should be more intensive. in other words, increasing the number of groups increases the constraints that agents face whendirecting and coordinating their actions during a segregation process. within atime geography framework, this constraint is called packing capacity , a constraint that derives from states in which large numbers of agents act within the same time space . differential packing capacities play an important role in attempting to understand the dependency relations observed between the hierarchical l evels of r esidential distributions, as i shall soon show.
thus, the qualitative difference between bottom up and top down aggregation effects is explained by the organization of the agents identities whereas the quantitative range and intensity of that aggregation are explained by the number of identities associated with each level. this mutual aggregationeffect implies that the source of discrepancies between preferences for ethnic composi tion and residential patterns is not only the actions taken at one level of the residentialhierarchy as posited by the schelling model, but also a result of actions taken at otherlevels. it is worth noting that the aggregation effect across levels of the residentialhierarchy is equivalent to the unintended consequences of the suspicious behaviour observed when sakoda s model is applied .
specifically, in that model, individuals with neutral attitudes toward one another mayform segregated groups driven only by negative attitudes toward a member of the othergroup. however, in the present case, segregation is caused by negative attitudes orintolerance toward a group located at another level.
to conclude, we should note that the assumption that only one of two levels in a hierarchy acts upon agents is not divorced from reality. situations in which agents with the ethnic subidentities live in the same residential area, especially if they are indifferent to this subidentity, are definitely not rare. consider the case of many frenchcities where members of an algerian ethnic group live in the same neighbourhood asmembers of other north african communities even though they prefer to live onlyamong algerians. or, consider the opposite case, in which an algerian who wants to664 io m e rlive among a north african population finds himself or herself in an area with a purely algerian population.
the influence of solely one level of a residential hierarchy as examined above is, of course, a special case. let us now examine the simultaneous influence of an agent s ethnic identities on residential distribution dynamics.
3.2 simultaneous top down and bottom up interdependence in general, the residential search process accounts for the two ethnic identities found atthe top and four ethnic subidentities bottom levels of the hierarchy, with each identitystipulating its respective conditions . to investigate this situation, theintolerance parameters k aandkbvaried between 0 and 1 at intervals of 0.1 s o ,121 simulation runs were observed. the results  show that the asymmetry between top down and bottom up influences isexpressed in a quite different and even surprising way from the pure aggregation effectexamined above. when the two levels operate simultaneously, the top level significantly strengthens the segregation observed at the bottom level for all possible agent behaviours, whereas the bottom level is observed to weaken the segregation at the top level .
the explanation for these results lies in the operation of a disaggregation effect in addition to the aggregation effect. whereas aggregation is an expression of the inclu sion of agents identities, disaggregation is an expression of the exclusion of thoseidentities. because a top level identity indicates unification and uniformity between bottom level identities, top down influences are expressed exclusively through aggregation. conversely, because bottom level identities indicate exclusion in the sense of thediversity and difference implicit in top level identities, bottom up influences are poten tially expressed in disaggregation as well. that is, because bottom up influences includerelations of unification in addition to separation, they exert a dual effect concurrent aggregation and disaggregation.
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 intolerance kbinlblevel intolerance kbinlblevel  intolerance kainlalevel0.75 1.00 0.50 0.750.25 0.50 figure 4. interdependence between hierarchical levels of residential ethnic distribut ions.
 the bottom up effect segregation at top level laresulting from the degree of intolerance at top level la and at bottom level lb the top down effect segregation  at bottom level lbresulting from the degree of intolerance at top level la and at bottom level . the bottom up effect weakens the segregation observed at lawhereas the top down effect strengthens the segregation observed at lb.how ethnicity influences residential distributions 6650.4 to 0.6 0.2 to 0.4 0.0 to 0.2 0.2 to 0.0  0.4 to 0.2 points represented in simulation images4 2 311.0 0.8 0.60.40.20.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 intolerance k binlblevel intolerance kbinlblevelintolerance kainlalevel1 4 2 3   only laactive both laand lbactive only lbactive ka 1 0 ka 1 0kb 0 5 ka 1 0kb 0 5 kb 0 5z  dsa 0 01 dsb 0 591  figure 5. additional value of segregation contributed by hierarchical levels of ethnic residential distributions for different values ofkaandkb. the contribution of lbto segregation at la the contribution of lato the segregation at lb. points 1 4 represent simulation images at selected values of parameter k for different qualitative domains of ds strong top down aggregation, strong bottom up disaggregation, intermediate top down and bottom up aggregation, strongtop down aggregation and bottom up disaggregation. a colour version of this figure can be viewed at http www.envplan.com misc  b31156 . each group is represented by one colour blue or red each subgroup is represented by a different shape of the group s colour.666 io m e rn psfiles epb3205w how ethnicity influences residential distributions 667 ka 0 4 ka 0 4kb 0 4 ka 0 4kb 0 4 kb 0 4 ka 0 2 ka 0 2kb 0 9 ka 0 2kb 0 9 kb 0 9 ka 0 6 ka 0 6kb 0 6 ka 0 6kb 0 6 kb 0 6  continuedz  dsa 0 36 dsb 0 03 z  dsa 0 12 dsb 0 01 z  dsa 0 20 dsb 0 202 3 4 figure 5 .the results clarify that lastrengthens segregation in lbmainly in domains where kais relatively high but kbis not . alternatively, lbweakens segregation i n lawhen the degree of intolerance at the two levels is not high . nonetheless, lbcan, potentially, strengthen segregation at lawhen intolerance at the lower level is very high . hence, the levels of hierarchy can simultaneously strengthen each other in cases of strong intolerance at both levels.
to clarify, the influence of one level on segregation at the other level at different values of kaandkb, the contribution to segregation at each level was calculated as the difference between the actual degree of segregation of a given level when both levels are active and the degree of segregation of that level when it alone is active, specifically, dsa sakb 0 sakb 0anddsb sbka 0 sbka 0. the results of this calculation and simulation images of the contribution of the different values of dsa anddsbare displayed in figure 5. three qualitative domains appear as a result of the influences described above, depending on the different values of parameter k.
domain a the influence of the top down aggregation effect is strong , whereas the influence of the bottom up disaggregation effect is weak . this influence is illustrated in figure 5 by a series of simulation images of the residential patterns obtained at both levels with the maximaltop down aggregation effect. hence, point 1 is the focal point of domain a the relativeincrease of segregation at the lower level equals 0.59 whereas the upper level, dsaequals only 0 01.
domain b the influence of the bottom up disaggregation effect is strong , whereas the influence of the top down aggregation effect is weak . the simulation images presented in figure 5  demonstrate the focal point of this domain the decrease in segregation at level lais dsa 0 36whereas the positive contribution at level lbisdsb 0 03only.
domain c each level of the hierarchy simultaneously strengthens the other. however, the bottom up positive influence is relatively much more powerful because of the strong bottom up aggregation effect. that effect, as discussed in section 3.1,characterizing situations where the d egree of intolerance at level l ais very low, such as that represented by figure 5 , where ka 0 2,kb 0 9. the results in that case are dsa 0 12,dsb 0 01.
the results presented in figure 5 reveal that the reciprocities between levels of ethnic residential distribution can be qualitatively transformed in response to changing intensities of intolerance at both levels. in such a case, the transition between the domains indicated above can be especially unbalancing for the reciprocities between the levels.an example of such a situation is illustrated in figure 5 , where aggregation anddisaggregation effects operate simultaneously at equal intensity. this creates a hybridreverse effect where the bottom up influence entails primarily disaggregation whereasthe top down influence entails primarily aggregation. the simulation images presentedin figure 5 are typical examples of reciprocities between levels of ethnic residential distribution the top down influence helps overcome constraints while the bottom up effect intensifies the constraints that the agents face.
the top down influence consistently strengthens segregation in the residential patterns at the lower level because of the spatial inclusion observed between the residential patterns found at different levels. spatial inclusion indicates physical ortangible nesting of the physical regions covered by those patterns. accordingly, because668 io m e rthe residential patterns of pbare physically fully nested within those of the patterns of pa, segregation between the lower residential patterns occurs within the space occupied by the upper residential patterns. for example, the segregation between pbpatterns p11 andp12occurs within the physical space occupied by papattern p1. in other words, when the paand the pbspatial patterns act simultaneously, the first channels the second toward a defined physical space and thereby decreases the packing capacity constraint that agents face when looking for a suitable location to which to migrate.this enables the bottom level to stimulate segregated residential patterns that, from theperspective of systems theory, can be viewed as efficiently functioning entities becauseof their hierarchical organization . as illustrated in figure 5 , the homogeneous clusters at the top level provide optimal conditions for segregation at the bottom level in effect, this promotes segre gation between two instead of four groups. in contrast to the top down effect, thebottom up effect decreases the possibility of finding desired locations at the l alevel through the influence of a disaggregation effect. the need to fulfil the agents prefer ences for a specific ethnic composition at the lower level increases the packing capacity constraint they face, given that imperfect or broken homogeneous clusters emerge at the upper level, as illustrated in figure 5 .
the differences between top down and bottom up effects on the intensity of the packing capacity constraint can be demonstrated by an analysis of migration. i examinedtwo variables the ratio of agents who tried to migrate, that is, potential migration in agiven iteration, and the ratio of agents who failed to do so, that is, they did not finda suitable new location and stayed at their present location despite the high dissonance.the values of these variables show that bottom level migration and failed migration rates are relatively much higher than the respective top level rates as a result of different levels of packing capacity constraints. the operation of top down aggregation can be clearly observed potential but especially failed migration rates decreasewhen the respective actions are taken on both levels simultaneously instead of on thebottom level only, that is, a decrease in the gap between preferences for ethniccomposition and actual behaviour. for example, when agents act in the context ofthe bottom level only, at intolerance of 0.5 , 12 of the agents do not find a suitable new location . but when the agents 1.0 0.80.60.40.20.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 intolerance k binlb intolerance kbinlbintolerance kainla 4 20.20 0.25 0.15 0.20 0.10 0.150.05 0.10 0.00 0.05   figure 6. migration implications of top down and bottom up effects ratio of agents who tried to migrate failed migration attempts.how ethnicity influences residential distributions 669also act according to the intolerance at the top level , just 1 on average do not succeed in finding a new location .
the migration analysis illustrates how intolerance at the bottom level weakens segregation at the top level, that is, an increase in the gap between preferences forethnic composition and actual behaviour. in general, no significant amount of failedattempts to find a new location can be identified when agents act solely in response totop level conditions. but when the agents act according to bottom level in additionto top level conditions, the potential and failed migration rates increase. furthermore,the bottom up influence is felt mainly when k b 0 2 0 7. this range actually fits the domain where the disaggregation effect is at its maximal intensity . however, if intolerance at the bottom level is high, that is, k b 0 7,a n d agents create segregated patterns at an earlier stage, they face m inimal constraints.
in that case, the p atterns move toward the domain where the hierarchical levels reinforce each other.
in light of these results, it is clear that the consequences of interdependence between levels of ethnic residential distribution can be qualitatively changed in response to the intensity of the agents intolerance. however, the general phenomenon observed tends to the reverse the bottom up influence entails primarily disaggregation betweengroups at the upper level whereas the top down influence entails primarily aggregationof the subgroups at the lower level.
the robustness of these relations was investigated from several aspects. i analyzed the influence of the size of the cellular space , of the probability of an agent acting in each iteration and of the initial distribution of agents, with a distribution over 90 of the cells instead of an empty cellular space. during all these tests, the results did not change significantly.
4con clusions the schelling model provides a theoretical framework for dealing with the effect of ethnic preferences on residential patterns. in this paper i have investigated the influ ence of the organization of an agent s ethnic identities on ethnic residential patterns byextending that model to include a further hierarchical level, that is, the agents ethnicidentities are organized in a two level hierarchy.
abs reveals that the degree of segregation of residential patterns at a given level of ethnic residential distribution can also be the result of responses to intolerance behav iour at another level. the simulation experiments also show that the consequences oftop down and bottom up interdependence of ethnic residential distributions can qual itatively change in response to varying intensities of intolerance at both levels .
however, as a result of the asymmetric nesting of agents ethnic identities andthe tangible residential patterns subsequently established, top down and bottom up influences are generally displayed in the following form intolerance behaviour at the top level strengthens observed segregation at the bottom level, whereas intolerancebehaviour at the bottom level weakens the segregation observed at the top level. basedon these findings, we can conclude that increasing intolerance between the members ofethnic minorities and members of the majority in a city tends to strengthen segregationbetween the subgroups within the minority ethnic population. viewed from a positivestance, greater tolerance between minorities and the majority tends to weaken subethnic enclaves in the city. moreover, tendencies toward self segregation among some subgroups within an ethnic minority contribute to the moderation of residentialsegregation between that minority group and the majority.670 io m e rthis conclusion enables interpretation of empirical findings concerning the relationship between the patterns observed at the different hierarchic levels of a givenethnic residential distribution. the case of yaffo s arab community, for example, as described in the introduction, can be understood better in light of this conclusion. the evidence of declines in the degree of residential segregation between christians andmoslems within the arab community, identified in an earlier stage, may contributeto the decreasing contemporary residential segregation between the arab minorityconsidered as a single group and the jewish majority. thus, extending the schellingmodel to include an additional hierarchical level opens the door to further researchdealing with the role of ethnic preferences on residential choice. such research would enable evaluation of the consequences of individual preferences for the ethnic composition of residential patterns irrespective of the hierarchic level of ethnic residentialdistribution being discussed.
moreover, the conclusions of this study indicate that the discrepancy between preferences for ethnic composition and residential patterns, a phenomenon alreadyrevealed by the schelling model, not only results from actions taken at one level ofthe residential hierarchy, it also results from actions taken at other levels. considered from a wider perspective, urban residential patterns exhibit some autonomy and are not merely the direct consequences of the intolerance felt between members of specificethnic groups. as such, they can potentially influence institutionalized preferences forspecific ethnic compositions.
the experimental findings brought forth in this study invite further questions worthy of research. on the one hand, more empirical evidence is required to supportthe conclusions drawn from the study. on the other hand, additional experiments are needed with more realistic assumptions related to organization of an agent s ethnic identities, such as asymmetric intolerance between groups and between subgroups.also needed is research into situations where subgroups are not properly nested withinthe higher level groups.
references