environment and planning b planning and design 2012, volume 39, pages 1131 1150 doi 10.1068 b38117 countering urban segregation in brazilian cities  policy oriented explorations using agent based simulation fl via f feitosa , quang bao le , paul l g vlekcenter for development research , university of bonn, walter flex str. 3, d 53113, bonn, germany e mail avia dpi.inpe.br, quang.le env.ethz.ch, p.vlek uni bonn.de ant nio miguel v monteiro, roberta rosemback  earth system science center , national institute for space research ,avenue dos astronautas, 1758, 12227 001, s o jos dos campos, brazil e mail miguel dpi.inpe.br, roberta dpi.inpe.brreceived 12 july 2011 in revised form 15 november 2011 abstract. in this study we use agent based simulations to explore the impact of social mix  policies on the segregation dynamics of s o jos dos campos, a medium sized brazilian city. we use the model masus, multi agent simulator for urban segregation, to test two policy strategies one based on the spatial dispersal of poverty, and the other on the spatial dispersal of wealth. the experiments indicated that these strategies reveal varying shortcomings and complementary benefi ts in cities such as s o jos dos campos. while  poverty dispersal provides immediate results on segregation levels and direct benefi ts for  the assisted families, wealth dispersal can produce long term outcomes and promote a positive change in the overall levels and patterns of segregation in the city.
keywords urban segregation, social mix, urban policies, social simulation, agent based  model, brazil 1 introductiondespite being the largest economy in latin america, brazil remains among the nations with the highest indicators of income inequality in the world . such inequality has implications for the spatial organization of cities, where income segregation represents  one of their most outstanding features, with impacts that reinforce the social exclusion of disadvantaged families . in brazil and other latin american countries, the dynamic relationship between income segregation and social exclusion has often created a continuous downward spiral segregation promoting exclusion, and exclusion promoting segregation. on the one hand, the legal market for affordable and habitable housing in these countries has proven incapable of meeting the needs of socially excluded families. for these families, informal and clandestine means of accessing and occupying urban land are often the only available alternatives. such exclusionary reality promotes the consolidation of highly segregated settlements, characterized by deprivation and nonrealization of housing rights . on the other hand, segregation imposes dif culties on the daily life of   also at earth system science center , national institute for space research , avenue  dos astronautas, 1758, 12227 001, s o jos dos campos, brazil.
 also at natural and social science interface , institute for environmental decisions ,  swiss federal institute of technology zurich , universit tstr. 22, ch 8092, zurich, switzerland.
 also at centre for regional development and planning , university of minas gerais  . avenue ant nio carlos, 6627, 31270 901, belo horizonte, brazil.1132 f f feitosa, q b le, p l g vlek, a m v monteiro, r rosemback disadvantaged families, perpetuating or worsening their condition of exclusion. for example,  poor segregated areas have been consistently associated with higher exposure to violence and disease, prejudice and territorial stigmatization, decreased accessibility that imposes time consuming trips to work or school, and low quality of the built and natural environment .
while housing policies in many developed countries have long focused on minimizing  segregation and its negative effects , brazil still presents  a wide disparity between the scienti c debates that advocate spatial integration of social  groups and the actual policy practice. for example, brazilian housing policies continue to rely on strategies that have been condemned and avoided in other countries, such as the creation of large social housing settlements for the poor that are located on cheap land in the outskirts of the city. by focusing exclusively on minimizing the housing de cit, this type  of policy displaces poor families to isolated areas, distant from the supply of equipment, services, and opportunities, which very often turn into distressed neighbourhoods .
designing and implementing policies that effectively promote integration among  different social groups is not an easy task. studies evaluating the experience of developed countries present several divergences concerning the impact of social mix policies and indicate that there is no single formula for success. expected achievements are not likely to be attained without well informed policies that address the local particularities of mechanisms that in uence segregation dynamics.  studies that improve our understanding about the dynamics of segregation are essential  for the development of social mix policies. nevertheless, such studies are challenged by the fact that segregation presents features commonly associated with complex systems , which,  according to batty and torrens , are entities that are coherent in some recognizable way but whose elements, interactions, and dynamics generate structures and admit surprise and novelty that cannot be de ned a priori. from this perspective, segregation  can be seen as an emergent structure or property of a complex urban system. its consistent patterns, observable at the macrolevel, emerge from interactions at the microlevel between many families, who are constantly making decisions about their residential location.  the complex nature of segregation is better represented by tools that are capable of  capturing its dynamics from the bottom up, prioritizing the process rather than the product . considering that, in this study we adopt an agent based modeling approach based on individual decision making units, called agents, which interact with each other and their environment . by explicitly simulating interaction processes that occur at a microlevel, abm enables researchers to explore the emergence of macrostructures from the bottom up in a very natural way .  we use agent based simulations to explore the impact of social mix policy approaches on  the segregation dynamics of a brazilian city. the simulations were performed with masus , an empirically based model that provides a laboratory for studying the emergence of segregation patterns. the model masus was proposed and extensively described by feitosa et al . in the study reported here, masus  is used to test and compare the outcomes of two different social mix policy strategies one based on the spatial dispersion of poverty, and the other on the spatial dispersion of wealth. the rst promotes integration by moving poor households out of problematic neighbourhoods,  whereas the second stimulates the construction of residential developments for middle and upper classes in poor regions of the city. the experiments relied on empirical data collected for s o jos dos campos, a medium sized city in the state of s o paulo, brazil.policy oriented explorations using agent based simulation 1133 2 promoting and countering urban segregation identifying mechanisms that in uence the emergence of segregation is an important step  towards the development of effective social mix policies. considering existing studies, it is possible to identify approaches focusing on the following mechanisms personal preferences, labour market, land and real estate markets, and the state. the rst approach, which  concentrates on personal preferences , offers a limited contribution for the development of  social mix policies, since it analyses segregation as a social practice that results from the attempt by some families to reinforce their social identities through shared values and to improve their quality of life.
the second approach considers the inequalities of the labour market and its socioeconomic  impacts as being responsible for segregation and the precarious life conditions of part of the urban population . to counteract segregation, this approach calls for structural macroeconomic policies, such as scal and monetary policies, as well as long term  investments in public education and health care.  the third approach focuses on the dynamics of land and real estate markets . it stresses  how real estate agents stimulate a competition for housing that reinforces the self segregation of higher income groups and the exclusion of disadvantaged families . the state can play an active role in mitigating segregation impacts related to the land and real estate market by setting initiatives to regulate its dynamics, such as creating measures to diversify land use and promoting developments for upper classes in areas occupied by disadvantaged families. this stimulus to promote the spatial dispersion of wealthy families  can occur through public investment in infrastructure and security, changes in the norms of land use, tax exemption measures, and concessions .  while the previous discussion demonstrates the importance of governmental institutions  in regulating mechanisms that promote segregation, some studies focus on how the state  can also intensify segregation through its permissiveness, urban legislation, or investments . examples include the widespread practice of exclusionary zoning, the unequal distribution of urban investment, and social housing projects that result in large areas of poverty concentration. in the united states and some european countries, where minimizing urban segregation became a target explicitly expressed in policy debates, many of these practices were already recognized as a mistake and several social mix strategies have been adopted to integrate different social groups.  policy strategies for promoting integration through the spatial dispersion of poverty focus  on moving low income households out of distressed areas into wealthier neighbourhoods. examples of housing programmes that adopt this strategy include the moving to opportunity and hope vi in the united states, which distribute housing vouchers to low income families for use when renting private dwellings in neighbourhoods with low poverty rates.
the renewal of troubled neighbourhoods , a strategy that has also been adopted in some  developing countries, includes measures to improve local services and social programmes, oppose delinquencies and territorial stigmas, demolish high density construction, build high quality houses, and encourage middle class households to move into these areas. another social mix strategy involves regulating new developments by requiring mixed occupancy  as a condition for approval or funding. these regulations often allow local authorities to negotiate a percentage of affordable units within new residential developments in exchange for planning permission .
there are many divergences regarding the impact of policies aimed at minimizing  segregation. some studies identify several accomplishments and judge many policies to be successful , while others focus on their failure and the need for restructuring them . such divergences reinforce the relevance of 1134 f f feitosa, q b le, p l g vlek, a m v monteiro, r rosemback constantly monitoring and adjusting policies to attain the expected results. most importantly,  the design of these policies must consider the particularities of cities, which differ in segregation patterns, population composition, levels of deprivation, culture, structure of housing markets, and many other features that demand speci c approaches.
3 the masus model we use the model masus to assess the impact of different social mix policy approaches in a brazilian context. this section provides a brief introduction to masus, while its detailed description and theoretical speci cations can be found in feitosa et al .
masus is a scienti c tool designed to represent segregation as an emergent property of  complex urban systems and to serve as a laboratory that provides alternative scenarios that   explore the impact of different contextual mechanisms on the emergence of segregation  patterns   support planning actions by offering insights into the adequacy of policy strategies.  since masus relies on empirical data and methods, it allows us to consider the  particularities of a speci c area while exploring possible states that the system can reach  after the implementation of certain policy strategies. it does not mean that the model should provide a deterministic answer about the best policy approach to be adopted, as no model is able to consider all the relevant dimensions of a decision making process. still, the model is expected to provide new elements for stimulating debate, questions, critiques, and information exchange among stakeholders. it aims, therefore, to contribute to the development of better informed urban policies.
in the masus model, the urban system is composed of two interrelated subsystems,  the urban population and the urban landscape. at the microlevel of the urban population, household agents represent the residents of the city. they have their own speci c state and  are periodically deciding to stay or to move to another residential location. at the macrolevel, global segregation patterns emerge as an outcome of the household agents decisions. once an agent decides to move, it is contributing to a change in the spatial arrangement of social groups in the city, that is, change to its segregation levels.  the urban landscape is the environment where household agents are situated and where  they act. it provides a spatially explicit context for the agents and is represented as a grid of landscape cells , with their own state and transitional dynamics .  3.1 process overview the operational masus model is implemented in netlogo 4.1 and its  simulation protocol includes the following directives  step 1 set up the initial state of the system .
step 2 start the annual cycle.
2.1 execute the decision making submodel  2.2 calculate and report segregation indices  2.3 update population and landscape state for the next cycle  2.4 update year and repeat annual cycle.
3.2 initial state of the system the rst step of the simulation, which sets up the initial state of the system, imports gis  data that represents the population and landscape state of the study area at the beginning of the simulation . the current masus model is implemented for s o jos dos campos  , a brazilian city with a population of 629 921 , and its initialization  uses empirical data that replicate the characteristics of the city in 1991.  table 1 presents the variables that represent the state of household agents and landscape  cells in the simulation. these variables are relevant either directly or indirectly to the policy oriented explorations using agent based simulation 1135 locational behaviour of households. since this relevance changes according to the empirical  context that is being examined, their selection should take into consideration the results of residential mobility analyses for the study area .
the initial population of agents represents the full population of the city, consisting of  106 591 households in 1991. these data were obtained from the brazilian census , loaded as vector points and assigned to household agents.  the data used to represent the state of landscape cells were obtained from different  sources, including the brazilian census, maps provided by the local government, and satellite images and aerial photographs. since historical real estate market information is not available from of cial sources, this data was collected from property advertisements in newspapers in  the municipal archive. the total number of dwellings offered in each neighbourhood and the average price per m 2 in 1991 was taken as proxy for dwelling offers and  land value. all data related to the urban landscape were loaded as raster or vector polygons and assigned to a grid of cells, where each cell measures 100 m   100 m.  3.3 decision making submodel after setting up the initial state of the system, it is possible to start the annual cycle, which is the main time loop of the simulation. the rst procedure of the annual cycle is to execute  the decision making sub model, responsible for the household s decision about moving to  another residential location. by executing this submodel, each agent calculates utilities for different alternatives and has a higher probability of selecting the one with the highest utility. while selecting residential alternatives, the household agent evaluates n  locations from a valid set that excludes places without available dwellings. since the model assumes that agents can consider the possibility, even if small, of living in any neighbourhood of the city, there are no restrictions regarding the characteristics of the neighbourhoods selected to be evaluated.
after computing the agent s probability of choosing the residential alternatives, the  submodel executes a monte carlo simulation to select one of them. the household agent then performs the action that matches the selected alternative.
figure 1. location of s o jos dos campos, brazil. the selected region corresponds to areas that are  urbanized or subject to urban expansion. 1136 f f feitosa, q b le, p l g vlek, a m v monteiro, r rosemback table 1. state variables in the masus model.
entity state variable source household  agentincome income of the head of household census data edu education of the hoh age age of the hoh size household size kids presence of children renter tenure status  physical aspects  landscape  cellslope terrain slope topographic map  gis based calculations urban urban occupation landsat satellite images dwe number of dwellings census data infra infrastructure quality index  accessibility  cbd distance to the central business district zoning road maps  gis based calculations roads distance to roads zoning legislation  zprot environmentally protected areas zoning map zres residential areas zmix mixed use areas zind predominantly industrial areas zsocial areas of social interest zvacant vacant urban land zc central zone far floor area ratio real estate market  lvalue land value property advertisements offer dwelling offers neighbourhood types  type a neighbourhoods with high land values  and housing quality, good infrastructure and services, as well as many gated communities and apartment complexes.census data aerial  photos of cial data on  residential settlements eldwork type b the most socially diverse type of  neighbourhood. they are well served with infrastructure, and often concentrate many services and commercial activities.
type c neighbourhoods with a predominance of  low cost dwellings. despite the poverty concentration, these areas have basic infrastructure and services. it includes social housing settlements.
type d irregular settlements, characterized by  substandard housing and lack of tenure security and public investments. policy oriented explorations using agent based simulation 1137 3.3.1 nested logit probability the probability function used in the decision making submodel and its reference parameters were obtained from the estimation of a three level nested logit model . the   rst level concerns the household decision about moving or staying and focuses on how  personal attributes such as age and tenure status can in uence the households mobility. the  second level focuses particularly on the neighbourhood type choice . having decided to  move, the household can choose between moving within its current neighbourhood ,  moving to the same type of neighbourhood , eg, from an irregular settlement to another one,  and moving to a different type of neighbourhood . the neighbourhood types considered in the analysis are described in table 1.  the third level of the nlm concerns the neighbourhood location choice and  complements the second level by including particular neighbourhood characteristics that may in uence the household choice for a certain location independently of the second level  alternatives .
considering that  ,xy , kij ji , and zi refer to the vectors of explanatory variables speci c  to categories , , and , respectively, the probability of choosing a particular  branch k in limb j, trunk i is   pr pr pr prkk i j j i i .  the conditional probability pr and pr in equation are   pr expkij xx11  ,  ,tt jikij minij nxbxb ee ,  and  pr exp expji i i yy11  tt iji ji ji lmi mi mi mxaxxax ee ,  where i ji is the inclusive value for category , which transfers information from the  neighbourhood location choice model to the neighbourhood type choice model . formally,  i ji is the log of the denominator of the conditional probability  pr. the term jix is a dissimilarity parameter that provides a summary measure of  the degree of correlation among alternatives in the nest . the term i ji jix represents  choicestay movesame neighbourhoodneighbourhood a 1 . . .
neighbourhood a n neighbourhood b1 . . .
neighbourhood b nsame type of  neighbourhood another type of  neighbourhood first level  mobility decisionsecond level  neighbourhood type  choicethird level  neighbourhood location choice figure 2. nested logit framework for the decision making submodel .1138 f f feitosa, q b le, p l g vlek, a m v monteiro, r rosemback the expected utility that the decision maker receives from the choice among the alternatives  in nest .
the probability of choosing i, pr, is  prexpexpiii zz tt ll l lii i cxcx   ,  where  ln exp ii y1  t i lmi mi mi mxax cm e .  to estimate the parameters of the probability function, we used a household survey  of 7910 respondents conducted in 2003 . for each respondent, the survey provides information about the household s characteristics and its retrospective residential mobility history. on the basis of this data, it was possible to obtain the dependent variable of the nlm and household speci c  variables. the neighbourhood speci c variables were obtained from the sources mentioned  in subsection 3.2 and table 1.
since this work evaluates income segregation, the variable income of the head of the  household was used to stratify the model estimation. three income intervals were considered up to 4 times the minimum wage , 4 10 times mw, and more than 10 times mw. despite this income based strati cation, the heterogeneity of the families was considered  through the inclusion of other variables in the model, such as education level and age of the hoh.
the selection of explanatory variables relied on hypotheses about the determinants of  household mobility and neighbourhood choice . for the rst level, which concerns  the choice of moving or not, the hypotheses focus on household characteristics that may in uence mobility behaviour. the second and third levels of the nlm focus on how  households assess the characteristics of potential residential locations. while the second level considers the impact of these characteristics in terms of the neighbourhood type choice, the third level concerns their general impact on the location choice, regardless of the second level alternatives. the coef cients of residential location variables were rst estimated for  the second level alternatives. in case they were not signi cantly distinguishable among these  alternatives, the variables were then considered in the third level of the model as generic.  the coef cients of the nlm were estimated with respect to the choice stay and the  results are presented in table 3.  3.4 segregation indices after executing the decision making submodel, the next procedures in the annual cycle are to calculate and report segregation indices. the masus simulation outputs are monitored  through global and local segregation indices. global indices summarize the segregation degree of the whole city, while local indices depict segregation as a spatially variant phenomenon and are shown as maps. the model reports two spatial segregation indices spatial dissimilarity index its global version measures how the population composition  of each neighbourhood differs, on average, from the population composition of the whole city. it varies from 0 to 1 . the local version of this index shows  how much each neighbourhood contributes to the global d measure of the city.   spatial isolation index of group m its global version qm measures the average proportion  of group m in the neighbourhood of each member of this group. it ranges from 0 to 1   and its values depend on the overall population composition of the city. policy oriented explorations using agent based simulation 1139 for example, if there is an increase in proportion of group m in the city, the value of qm tends  to become higher. the index qm also presents a local version q,mj.  3.5 additional submodels after reporting the simulation outputs, the program executes submodels that update  the population and landscape state for the next cycle . to update the population state,  complementary bottom up and top down submodels are executed the household transition and the population transition. the household transition submodel relies on a set of rule based functions that simulate certain household events . it is complemented by the population transition submodel, which is responsible for maintaining the growth and sociodemographic composition of the population according to annual control variables de ned by the modeller. it creates households with pro les that meet the expected  composition of the population . table 2. explanatory variables and hypotheses.
variable hypothesis first level mobility decision age mobility decreases as the age of the head of the household increases renter renters have higher mobility rates than owner occupiers renter  incomerenters with limited nancial resources are more vulnerable to housing insecurity  and more likely to present higher mobility rates.
second and third level neighbourhood type and location choice  move1 move2move3families are more likely to stay in their current residence than to move . thus, the estimated coef cients for the alternative speci c constants  for moving within the same neighbourhood , to the same type of  neighbourhood , and to another type of neighbourhood are  expected to have a negative effect on the household s utility.  dist households prefer to move to places with smaller distance to the original place of  residence in order to keep their social bonds.  lvalue  incomehouseholds usually choose to spend a smaller portion of their income on housing.  offer new investments in housing attract residents and consolidate  residential expansion vectors.  cbd smaller distances to the central business district increases the attractiveness of  neighbourhoods.  second and third level neighbourhood type and location choice  lower middle higherhouseholds tend to choose places with a higher proportion of neighbours belonging  to their income group. thus, variables representing the proportion of income groups in the neighbourhoods were included in the model of the respective group.  typea typeb typectypedhigher income families are more likely to choose type a or type b neighbourhoods  middle income are more likely to choose type b and lower income are more likely to choose type c or d.
typeb edu typed edulower income families with a better educated hoh have a higher chance to  move to type b neighbourhoods, and a smaller chance to move to irregular neighbourhoods  typec infra middle income families may move to poorer neighbourhoods if the area  provides good infrastructure and services.  typea kids higher income families with children are more likely to choose type a  neighbourhoods, given the security related appeal of gated communities. 1140 f f feitosa, q b le, p l g vlek, a m v monteiro, r rosemback table 3. nested logit model coef cients adopted as reference for the probability function of the  decision making model.  level choice variable coef cients for income groups lower income middle income higher income 1st move age 0.043 0.046 0.040  renter 3.080 2.243 2.542  renter income 1.2 ns ns 2nd move within  the same neighbourhoodmove1 1.592 2.123 2.532  offer ns ns cbd ns lower ns move to the  same type of neighbourhoodmove2 3.810 2.631 2.464  offer 1.9 1.9  cdb 6.7  lower 0.953  typea ns typeb ns ns typec ns ns typed ns typeb edu ns typed edu ns typec infra ns typea kids ns move to  another type of neighbourhoodmove3 6.163 2.451 3.457  offer 3.0 1.9  cdb 10.3  lower 1.520  typea ns typeb ns ns typec 2.379 ns typed 2.254  typeb edu 0.195  typed du ns typec infra ns typea kids 1.49  3rd generic  variablesdist 1.3 11.1 4.9  lvalue income ns 0.04 ns offer 1.4  cbd ns ns middle 1.435  higher 0.960  dissimilarity parameters move 0.658 0.752 0.666   move2 0.449 0.292 0.384   move3 0.791 0.453 0.552   , , and indicate statistical signi cance at the 99 , 95 , and 90 levels, respectively.  ns indicates no statistical signi cance.policy oriented explorations using agent based simulation 1141 four submodels are executed to update the following aspects of the system s landscape  state urban sprawl, land value, dwelling offers, and infrastructure. the urban sprawl submodel simulates the expansion of the urbanized areas in the city. its rst phase employs  markov chain methods to quantify the sprawl, while the second relies on logistic regression probabilities to allocate new urban cells. the dwelling offers submodel relies on rulebased functions and regression models to update the number of dwellings in each cell. the land value submodel uses hedonic price models to estimate the land value of cells, while  the infrastructure submodel estimates the infrastructure quality of each cell using linear  regression models . the speci cation of these submodels and the empirical  calibration of their parameters are presented in feitosa .
after updating the population and landscape state, the program repeats the annual cycle.  4 exploring antisegregation strategies spatial dispersal of poverty versus spatial  dispersal of wealth. experiment designto assess the impact of different social mix policy approaches, three different scenarios were simulated in masus baseline scenario, spatial dispersal of poor families, and spatial dispersal of wealthy families. to evaluate these scenarios, global and local versions of three spatial segregation indices were computed for each simulated time step spatial dissimilarity , spatial isolation of low income households ,  and spatial isolation of high income households . since previous multiscale  analyses of segregation in s o jos dos campos revealed distinct spatiotemporal trends when  computing these indices for different scales of neighbourhood , the present  study considered two representative neighbourhood scales for monitoring the simulation  outputs a local scale, where the household s neighbourhood comprises the area within a 700 m radius of its residence location, a distance that can be easily covered on foot, and a large scale, where this radius is 2000 m.
4.1 baseline scenario the baseline scenario is used as a reference for evaluating the relative impact of antisegregation policies. the intent of this scenario is to reproduce the segregation dynamics of s o jos dos campos during the periods 1991 2000 and 2000 10. the initial state of the experiment replicates the characteristics of the city as described in subsection 3.2.  a baseline scenario for the period 1991 2000 was previously presented by feitosa et al  , where nine simulation annual cycles were executed and compared with real data for the year 2000. this comparison was conducted in terms of the spatial distribution of income groups, that is, the change in the magnitude of the overall segregation revealed by the global segregation indices and in the spatial segregation patterns revealed by the maps of local indices.
despite the satisfactory results originally achieved with the parameters estimated from  statistical models , a calibration consisting of small changes in some parameters of the decision making submodel improved the t between the simulated and real  data. these changes concerned the parameters estimated for the variables representing the proportion of neighbours belonging to each income group .  for the experiments presented in this paper, it was also necessary to simulate a baseline  scenario for 2000 10, which adopted the same decision making parameters calibrated for the previous period.  4.2 policy experiment 1 spatial dispersal of poor families the scenarios simulating the spatial dispersal of poor families test the effect of a social mix policy that moves poor households out of distressed areas by distributing housing vouchers. in the experiment, poor families that are selected randomly from locations with high poverty 1142 f f feitosa, q b le, p l g vlek, a m v monteiro, r rosemback isolation receive housing vouchers to rent dwellings in neighbourhoods in which the isolation  of poor families is below the average. for the period 1991 2000, the experiment consists of simulating two scenarios with progressive distribution of housing vouchers from 200 to 1700 vouchers and from 500 to 4200 vouchers gure 3 . for the period 2000 10, the two  simulation runs kept a constant investment in the housing programme at 1700 and at 4200 vouchers, respectively gure 3 .  4.3 policy experiment 2 spatial dispersal of wealthy families the scenario simulating the spatial dispersion of wealthy families assumes the successful  implementation of policies that address the dynamics of the real estate market by stimulating the construction of residential developments for middle and upper classes in poor regions of the city. in practice, these policies represent a challenging task, as they should include a diversi ed set of measures, such as concessions, tax exemptions, changes in land use norms,  as well as investment in security, local facilities, and infrastructure.  to conduct the experiment, some undeveloped areas located in poor regions of the  city were identi ed from orthophotos and, in the model, the state variables concerning the   neighbourhood type of the landscape cells corresponding to these areas were prede ned as   type a , that is, settlements designed for residential occupation by middle and upper classes, with good housing quality, infrastructure and services. considering the preestablished conditions for the development of these settlements, a simulation run was executed for the period 1991 2010.
5 results and discussion 5.1 impact of policies based on the spatial dispersal of poor families  5.1.1 period 1991 2000 increasing number of housing vouchers the graphs in gure 4 present the progression of global segregation indices during the period  1991 2000 for three simulated scenarios baseline , alternative 1 , and alternative 2 . the graphs show indices computed for different scales of neighbourhood . for each experiment, at least ve replications were performed and, despite the stochastic  nature of the model, all the replications produced the same results.  the global dissimilarity index d computed for a local neighbourhood scale ,  which in the baseline scenario increased from 0.26 to 0.28 in the period 1991 2000, increased to 0.27 in the rst alternative scenario gure 4 . in this scenario, the distribution  number of vouchers5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0  1991 1993 1995 no voucher no voucher  1700 vouchers 4200 vouchers200 1700 vouchers 500 4200 vouchers1997 1999 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 figure 3. scenarios of the experiment on spatial dispersal of poverty number of housing vouchers  distributed during the periods 1991 2000 and 2000 10.policy oriented explorations using agent based simulation 1143 of 1700 vouchers, which bene t 2.3 of the low income households in the year 2000,  caused a decrease of 3.5 in the dissimilarity index. in the second alternative scenario, the distribution of vouchers to 5.8 of the low income households decreased the dissimilarity index by 10.7 .  the positive impact of distributing vouchers was less signi cant for larger neighbourhood  scales gure 4 . in the baseline scenario, the global dissimilarity index d computed for a  2000 m neighbourhood radius increased from 0.19 to 0.21 during 1991 2000. compared with the baseline run, the rst alternative scenario presented equal or slightly lower dissimilarity  indices, whereas the second alternative presented constant levels of dissimilarity during the period.  the global indices of isolation demand careful evaluation, since their values are  in uenced by the proportions of the income groups in the city. during the period 1991  2000, the proportion of high income households increased from 0.15 to 0.19, and their spatial isolation computed for a 700 m neighbourhood radius increased from 0.33 to 0.36 in the baseline scenario gure 4 . this last result  0.21iso low  iso low iso high  iso high diss  diss 0.28 0.27 0.26 0.25 0.36 0.35 0.34 0.33 0.32 0.60 0.59 0.58 0.57 0.560.20 0.19 0.31 0.30 0.29 0.28 0.27 0.26 0.57 0.56 0.55 1991 1993 no voucher  alternative 1 200 1700 vouchers alternative 2 500 4200 vouchers1995 1997 1999 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 figure 4. progression of global segregation indices for the  scenarios on poverty dispersal for the period 1991 2000. spatial dissimilarity index spatial dissimilarity index spatial isolation of high income group spatial isolation of high income group spatial isolation of low income group spatial isolation  of low income group .

 1144 f f feitosa, q b le, p l g vlek, a m v monteiro, r rosemback means that, on average, 36 of the neighbours of a high income household belonged to the  same income group in 2000. this value is much higher than the overall percentage for this group in the city .  as presented in gures 4 and 4, the spatial isolation index for high income families  decreased signi cantly in both scales as the investment in the housing  programme increased. for example, the distribution of housing vouchers to 5.8 of the low income households caused a decrease of 8.3 in the isolation of high income households measured at the local scale . regarding the isolation level of low income households, however, the impacts of the housing programme were disappointing. the distribution of vouchers to 5.8 of the low income households decreased the isolation of this group by only 3.4 gure 4 . the  contribution of the policy regarding decreasing the isolation of low income households is even less signi cant when the analyses rely on the index computed for larger neighbourhoods   gure 4 . in this case, the distribution of 1700 vouchers did not decrease the  isolation of low income households, whereas the distribution of 4200 vouchers decreased the isolation by only 1.8 . this represents a relevant drawback of the voucher policy, as the isolation of low income households is the segregation dimension that has the most harmful impacts on the lives of disadvantaged people.  5.1.2 period 2000 10 constant number of housing vouchers the graphs in gure 5 present global segregation indices for the period 2000 10 obtained  from the experiments on poverty dispersal which kept the distribution of housing vouchers constant over the years. in these experiments, the baseline scenario 2000 10 is compared with two alternative scenarios in which 1700 and 4200 vouchers were distributed. the results show that this continued investment only slows the increase in segregation, as it was unable to modify the segregation trends in comparison with the baseline scenario.  these results reveal that in cities in developing countries where low income families  represent a larger share of the population, policies based on the distribution of vouchers require high and continuous investments to produce a signi cant change in the overall  segregation levels of the city. the required amount of investment is usually not feasible for these cities. nevertheless, the bene t of moving poor families out of distressed areas  can bring other bene ts that are not related to the segregation levels of the city as a whole.  rather, these bene ts could be related to personal experiences of families who received the  vouchers, including access to a set of advantages that are able to enhance the opportunity structure for these families, with impacts on both current and future generations. these advantages include better quality of built and natural environment, greater diversity in the neighbourhood social network, better access to different sources of information, improved educational and employment opportunities, and reduced vulnerability to crime. in this sense, the spatial distribution of poverty can be seen as a people based strategy.  in brazil, where housing policies follow the national culture of homeownership, measures  based on voucher distribution are seldom implemented. some initiatives in this direction can be found, but none focuses on decreasing segregation. they are mostly adopted as a temporary housing measure in emergency situations or for relocating families living in areas at imminent risk. due to the low value of the voucher, families often move to other problematic neighbourhoods with high levels of poverty concentration. in addition, as the distribution of vouchers is implemented for a limited period, usually no longer than 30 months, the families who receive the bene t  remain in a situation of uncertainty and vulnerability. policy oriented explorations using agent based simulation 1145 5.2 impacts of policies based on the spatial dispersal of wealthy families a simulation run considering the development of new settlements for middle and upper  classes in poor regions of the city was executed for the period 1991 2010 and the results compared with the baseline scenario. figure 6 presents the graphs comparing the global segregation indices for these scenarios along the years. in general, it can be observed that the policy approach based on wealth dispersal produces long term outcomes. the consolidation of the new areas designated for upper classes may take some years, and therefore their positive impacts on the global segregation indices become more substantial with time. this is an advantage in comparison with the poverty dispersion policy tested in subsection 5.1, which demands continued public investment in the form of housing vouchers. as soon as this investment ceases, its positive impact on segregation cannot be sustained.  the global segregation indices presented in gure 6 and table 4 indicate that the dispersion  of wealthy families tends to be more effective towards decreasing large scale segregation. for example, the dissimilarity index computed for a local scale for the year 2010 decreases 19 when the policy based on wealth dispersion is adopted,  diss  0.31 0.25 0.24 0.23 0.22 0.21 0.20 0.19 0.36 0.35 0.34 0.33 0.32 0.31 0.30 0.29 0.57 0.56 0.550.30 0.29 0.28 0.27 0.26 0.25    0.41 0.39 0.37 0.35 0.33 0.59 0.58iso low  iso low iso high  iso high diss  0.57 0.56 no voucher  1700 vouchers 4200 vouchers2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 figure 5. progression of global segregation indices  scenarios on poverty dispersal for the period 2000 10. spatial dissimilarity index spatial dissimilarity index spatial isolation of high income group spatial isolation of high income group spatial isolation of low income group spatial isolation of low income group .1146 f f feitosa, q b le, p l g vlek, a m v monteiro, r rosemback which is less than the decrease of 36 that is observed when the same index is computed for  a large scale . the same effect occurs for the other indices the isolation of af uent households in 2010 decreases 17 at the local and 25 at the large scale,  whereas the isolation of low income households decreases only 1.7 at the local scale but 5.3 at the large scale. this outcome represents another advantage in comparison with the approach based on poverty dispersal . segregation at larger scales, particularly the concentration of poverty, is considered more damaging than segregation at local scales .
the local version of the segregation indices complement the analyses by showing where  the most segregated areas in the city are and how spatial patterns of segregation can change with the implementation of social mix policies. figure 7 shows local segregation indices computed for the three simulated scenarios for the year 2010 baseline, spatial dispersal of poverty , and spatial dispersal of wealth. these indices are presented as maps, with darker colours representing higher levels of segregation.  in general, the maps of the local version of the dissimilarity index show a higher level of  dissimilarity in the central region of the city gures 7, , and . the isolation maps  0.31 0.26 0.24 0.22 0.20 0.18 0.16 0.36 0.340.32 0.30 0.28 0.26 0.24 0.57 0.56 0.55 0.540.30 0.29 0.28 0.27 0.26 0.25 0.42 0.40 0.38 0.36 0.34 0.320.30 0.60 0.59iso low iso high diss  iso low iso high diss  0.58 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 baseline dispersion of settlements for middle and upper classes   figure 6. progression of global segregation indices for the  scenario on wealth dispersal for the period 1991 2010. spatial dissimilarity index spatial dissimilarity index spatial isolation of high income group spatial isolation of high income group spatial isolation of low income group spatial isolation of low income group .policy oriented explorations using agent based simulation 1147 table 4. global segregation indices for 2010 for three  scenarios baseline , spatial dispersal of poverty 4200 vouchers , and spatial dispersal of wealth . percentage decreases in segregation levels compared with baseline are shown in parentheses.
local scale segregation 700 m  neighbourhood radiuslarge scale segregation 2000 m  neighbourhood radius bas sdp sdw bas sdp sdw spatial dissimilarity 0.31 0.29 0.25 0.25 0.23 0.16   spatial isolation of high income  families 0.41 0.38 0.34 0.36 0.33 0.27   spatial isolation of low income  families 0.59 0.58 0.58 0.57 0.56 0.54   figure 7. in colour online. local indices of segregation for three  simulation scenarios for the year 2010 baseline spatial dispersal of poverty and spatial dispersal of wealth. darker colours represent higher levels of segregation.q 0.36 d 0.25 q 0.57   spatial dissimilarity indexspatial isolation of high income householdsspatial isolation of low income householdsd 0.23 d 0.16   q 0.33 q 0.56 q 0.54 q 0.271148 f f feitosa, q b le, p l g vlek, a m v monteiro, r rosemback complement this information by indicating that the dissimilarity hot spot in the central area  is caused by the concentration of high income households gures 7, , and . the  isolation of low income households, on the other hand, presents a different spatial pattern, characterized by several hot spots located in different areas of the city gures 7, , and   .  the local segregation indices also indicate that the simulated wealth dispersal policy  was the most effective in modifying spatial patterns of dissimilarity and isolation of high income households. first, the local dissimilarity indices became smoother and spread throughout the city gure 7 . second, the isolation pattern of high income households,  which appeared in the baseline scenario as a consolidated axis starting from the central area of the city towards the western region gure 7 , became more spatially diffuse throughout  the city gure 7 . this spatial trend presented in the wealth dispersal scenario is positive,  as af uent residents are more likely to circulate through different parts of the city and  increase their contact with distinct social groups and realities . in addition, poor families located near residential projects for upper classes often bene t in terms of  employment, quality of services, and urban facilities .  6 conclusions  urban segregation is one of the most outstanding features of brazilian cities, with impacts that have been reinforcing the social exclusion of disadvantaged families. developing policies that effectively minimize segregation and its negative outcomes is a challenging task that depends on a better understanding of local particularities of segregation dynamics. in this study we used the model masus to explore the impact of urban policies on the segregation dynamics of s o jos dos campos. masus provides a laboratory for supporting experiments that address the complex nature of segregation and considering particular features of the study area. these experiments do not aim to provide deterministic answers or policy panaceas to be applied in different circumstances . instead, their purpose is to raise new  questions, ideas, and insights for a continuous learning process on the development of urban policies that promote a more integrated city.
contributing to this aim, we tested two different social mix strategies one based on the  spatial dispersal of poverty, and the other on the spatial dispersal of wealth. in cities such as s o jos dos campos, where, in comparison with cities in developed countries, low income families represent a large proportion of the population, these strategies revealed different bene ts and shortcomings. the distribution of housing vouchers, which promotes the spatial  dispersal of poverty, has the advantage of generating immediate results but demands intensive and continuous investment to produce signi cant changes in the segregation levels of the  whole city. as soon as the voucher distribution ceases, its positive impact on segregation cannot be sustained. this feature is particularly problematic in brazil, where housing policies focus on homeownership, and voucher based measures are seen as merely temporary solutions for emergency situations.  the spatial dispersal of wealthy families relies on implementing measures that stimulate  the construction of residential areas for middle and upper classes in poor regions of the city. unlike the policy based on poverty dispersal, this one generates long term results, as the consolidation of new settlements, typically, requires several years. as time passes, the positive impact of dispersing wealth becomes more expressive and less dependent on public investments. nevertheless, nding a combination of incentives that successfully promotes  the establishment of wealthy settlements in poor areas remains a challenge.
the results of these experiments also revealed that the wealth dispersal policy was more  effective in stimulating positive changes in the overall levels and patterns of segregation. policy oriented explorations using agent based simulation 1149 the policy promoted an expressive decrease in large scale segregation and a more diffuse  isolation pattern of af uent households. this is another advantage of the wealth dispersal  strategy in relation to the approach based on distributing housing vouchers, which was less effective with regard to modifying ongoing segregation trends. nevertheless, the poverty dispersal policies have merits that complement those based on wealth dispersal, as these policies introduce bene ts to the families who receive vouchers and can improve their  opportunity structure by positively affecting the lives of current and future generations.
references