overlooked implications of ethnic preferences for residential segregation in agent based models mark fossett and warren waren  paper rst received, july 2004 in nal form, february 2005  summary. we investigate the impact of preferences for co ethnic contact on residential segregation and nd support for the schelling hypothesis that modest preferences can have signi cant consequences for segregation under certain conditions. our ndings temper and in some instances contradict laurie and jaggi s claim that expanding vision , the size of theimmediate neighbourhood households consider when evaluating residential ethnic mix, makesstable integration a likely outcome in schelling like models with weak to moderate preferences.
we note several reasons why our results differ from laurie and jaggi s. the most important of these is that laurie and jaggi underestimate the segregation producing potential of weak to moderate preferences because they overlook a powerful interaction between preferences and ethnic demography and perform their simulations using the optimal ethnic mix for achieving integration. we show that the preferences laurie and jaggi describe as compatible with stableintegration generate high levels of segregation in their model under settings for ethnic demography common in real cities.
in a recent paper in this journal, laurie and jaggi reported research that, in theirview, requires that standard interpretationsof schelling s agent based model of residential segregation bereconsidered and revised. if correct, their conclusions may have signi cant implications as the schelling model is one of the most in uen tial and celebrated agent based models. it isseen as a valuable tool for investigating howmicro level residential choice behaviour canproduce aggregate level patterns of ethnic resi dential segregation and it is routinely cited asan exemplar of how relatively simple, microlevel behaviour can produce non obvious emergent structure in spatial networks . clark , krugman, young , epstein and axtell and wasserman and yohe areamong the many scholars and researcherswho have explored different aspects of schel ling s model and endorsed his conclusionsthat integration tends to be an unstable condition in model systems and that high levels of segregation can occur even when no individ ual in the population wishes to reside in thetype of ethnically homogeneous neighbour hood found in highly segregated cities.
laurie and jaggi extend schelling s model by investigating how vision , a parametergoverning the size of the immediate neighborhood surrounding a residential location, affects segregation behaviour. they reportthat vision interacts with preferences tourban studies, vol. 42, no. 11, 1893 1917, october 2005 mark fossett and warren waren are in the department of sociology, texas a m university, college station, texas 77843 4351, usa. fax 979 862 4057. e mail m fossett tamu.edu and wwaren yahoo.com. the research reported here and the development of the simseg simulation model have been supported in part by nih grants r43hd38199 and r44hd038199 . in addition, the research reported here was made possible in part by faculty development leave support provided by texas a m university.
0042 0980 print 1360 063x online 05 111893 25 2005 the editors of urban studies doi 10.1080 00420980500280354  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from produce non simple segregation behaviour  that includes stable integration under model speci cations they view as relevant for residential segregation in urban areas. accordingly, laurie and jaggi contend that their study provides evidenceagainst claims of inevitability of segregationin schelling like models and claim to have discovered that there is a large region ofthe parameter space for preferences andvision where integrated communities remain stable for arbitrarily long times  . they stress that this stable regimedoes not correspond to some unrealistic, gand hian levels of racial preferences tolerances of the agents but is consistent with non zeroand quite substantive values of preferencesand can serve to generate an optimisticoutlook for the future of neighbourhood integration . thus, they assert that contrary topopular belief, rather modest decreases inxenophobia and or preferences for one s own kind, when coupled with increased vision ,c a n lead to stable and integrated neighbourhoods and they suggest that the education community and other socialagents who work to lower preference for one s own kind and to increase tolerance for the other , can take strong encourage ment from this study .
we commend laurie and jaggi on a numberof counts. first, unlike some critics of theschelling model, they show great respect forschelling s contributions and the depth of his original insights. even as they question conventional assessments of schelling s the ories, they note that schelling himself wascareful to recognise the limits of his contri butions and showed subtle understanding ofthe complexity of the issues. thus, wheremany have studiously ignored schelling swork or dismissed it without engaging it in a direct way, laurie and jaggi take his model seriously they seek to extend and re ne itwith the goal of gaining a better understandingof the potential linkages between individualpreferences and segregation.secondly, laurie and jaggi display a welcome appreciation for the value of devel oping theory from the ground up by exploring models that are purposefully kept simple, at least initially, in order to gain a better under standing of the implications of the model.they resist the urge to introduce excessive realism in their model before the complexbehaviour manifest in simpler versions ofthe model are well understood. instead,they are guided by the view that theoretical development is served well by elaborating established models in incremental steps tominimise problems in establishing cause andeffect relations.
thirdly, laurie and jaggi provide clear descriptions of how they implement andmodify schelling s model. the broader litera ture on residential segregation is replete with discussions of the relationship between preferences and segregation that offer strongconclusions without outlining a model thatsupports them or providing a basis for evaluat ing the conclusions in a rigorous way. incontrast, laurie and jaggi are clear andexplicit about the components of their modeland the key mechanisms that drive their ndings. they give precise descriptions of how they implement preferences, urban structure,ethnic demography and agent behaviourinvolved in housing search and residentialchoice. in short, they provide the essentialingredients for cumulative scienti c inquiry a clearly speci ed model that facilitates repli cation and extension.
fourthly, they show a nuanced understanding of how segregation in real urban systemsis the product of many factors. they avoidcontrived arguments pitting one factoragainst another when there is no basis for por traying them as mutually exclusive or compet ing explanations. thus, while they recognisethe role of factors such as economic inequality, housing discrimination and institutional forces in segregation dynamics, they pursuean intentionally restricted analysis aimed atgaining a better understanding of the linkagesbetween preferences and segregation. thisleads them to suggest policy options forreducing segregation namely, enhancing1894 mark fossett and warren waren  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from available information about neighbourhood ethnic composition and promoting increasedtolerance of residential contact with outgroups and reduced preferences for in group contact that would not necessarily be high lighted in analyses focusing on other factorscontributing to segregation .
we applaud the laurie and jaggi study for the reasons just enumerated and for the care of their analysis and the clarity of their exposition. however, we believe that close scru tiny of their implementation of schelling smodel leads to the conclusion that their ndings must be interpreted more narrowlythan their discussion suggests. speci cally,we conclude that, while laurie and jaggi sresults are correct in most technical respects, the broad substantive implications they draw from their analyses must be discounted.first, their central ndings hinge on verylow settings for vision that have limited rel evance for residential segregation. secondly, they adopt idiosyncratic model settings forethnic demography and search that leadthem to underestimate seriously the impact of preferences on segregation and the magni tude of the changes in preferences that maybe needed to reduce segregation in real cities.
we establish the basis for our conclusions as follows. first, we introduce simseg, thesimulation model we use to perform our ana lyses, and highlight points of similarity anddifference between it and the model used by laurie and jaggi. secondly, we replicate key  ndings from the laurie and jaggi study toshow that the simseg model producessimilar segregation behaviour when imple menting model speci cations that correspondclosely with those used by laurie and jaggi.thirdly, we introduce variations in the speci cation of search and of vision to show how they in uence model generated segregation patterns. fourthly, and nally, we introduceother variations in model speci cation todocument that preferences and ethnicdemography interact in a complex way thatis both central to determining segregationbehaviour in agent based models and highlyrelevant to understanding residential segregation in real cities.
the simseg model the simseg programme is an agent based model written by the senior author of thispaper for the purpose of conducting simu lation experiments exploring segregationdynamics . thecharacteristics and capabilities of thesimseg programme have been outlined else where , however, only a few are relevant to the analyses presented in this paper.
1in this section of the paper, we brie y review thekey points of similarity and differencebetween the agent based model laurie andjaggi describe and simseg, the model weuse. we then use the simseg model to repli cate key ndings from the laurie and jaggi study and show that our contradiction of their ndings cannot be attributed to technicaldifferences between the two models.
the rst concept we consider is that of the  agent . in both models, agents are virtualhouseholds with the ability to search in avirtual housing market and make residentialchoices. households possess binary ethnic status. following laurie and jaggi, they are labelled either white or black. of course,these labels are arbitrary. households havepreferences for co ethnic contact speci ed interms of the percentage of co ethnic house holds found in the neighbourhood in whichthe household lives or to which it is consider ing moving. in the laurie and jaggi model, ethnic preferences are homogeneous within and across groups. in the simseg model, pre ferences may vary by ethnic group, a featureon which we draw in later analyses.
households reside in housing units at xed locations in a virtual city landscape. housingunits have no qualities other than occupancystatus and neighbourhood ethnic composition.
searching households can only move to unoccupied housing units. when they move, theyleave their origin housing unit unoccupiedand it becomes available . their destinationhousing unit becomes occupied andethnic preferences and residential segregation 1895  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from unavailable . in both models, housing units are arranged in a virtual city landscape . inthe laurie and jaggi model, the landscape consists of a 50 c250 square grid with 2500 housing units. there are no boundaries of any kind in the grid. the apparent east westboundaries of the visual representation of thegrid are analytically treated as wrappingaround to meet each other. the same is truewith regard to the apparent north southboundaries. thus, their landscape forms an  edgeless torus . simseg can also generate a landscape of this type. however, as isevident in gures presented in this paper, weprefer to use an alternative landscape inwhich housing units are organised into aroughly circular city form. in this implemen tation, housing units are grouped into 112 bounded areas in a neighbourhood grid and each area is sub divided into a square 7 c27 housing grid. this yields 5488 housing units and a virtual city landscape which has outerboundaries or edges analogous to those ofreal urban areas. laurie and jaggi describetheir edgeless torus landscape as attractivebecause it suppresses boundary effects but we nd no evidence that effects of this nature are important for any result we investigate here.
2 in both models, the initial condition is one of random assignment of households tolocations in the city landscape with 10 percent of housing units being left vacant. byde nition, residential location is not systema tically linked with racial status, so the city landscape is integrated at initialisation based on the notion of even distribution. laurie andjaggi quantify this dimension of segregationusing s , which they describe as the ensemble averaged, von neumann segregation coef cient .
3laurie and jaggi do not cite methodological studies, of sbut state that it varies between 0 and 1 and is closelyrelated to the dissimilarity index . methodologicalanalysis by fossett shows that sis equivalent to bell s familiar revisedindex of isolation and also is closely related to the well known eta squared index. we also found that sexhibits a strong correlation with the index of dissimilarity computed using an individual level computing formula for site centred areas givenin fossett .
4 our methodological analysis showed that the values of all three site centred measures,s, h2andd, were higher when the size of the immediate neighbourhood used in segre gation calculations was small. this raises amethodological question does the choice of segregation measures in uence substantive  ndings in agent based models laurie andjaggi measure segregation using scomputed for minimal von neumann neighbourhoodsand do not report results for other measuresor scales of segregation. happily, our methodo logical analysis found that scores for d, s and h2computed using the site centred areas correlated closely with each other whencomputed at different spatial scales and,these scores also correlated closely withscores computed using data for the 112bounded areas in the city landscape.
5in view of this, we report the index of dissimi larity computed from data for bounded areas. the measure is familiar it leads to identical substantive conclusions and computing it for bounded areas reduces the compu tational burden in our simulations.
one nal comment on measuring segregation, laurie and jaggi describe sas being normed against the expected value underrandom assignment. we draw on winship to apply a transformation formula that norms dagainst its expected value under random assignment. due to the norming procedures, both sanddcan take on negative values. when this occurs, it indi cates that the city is more integrated than would be expected under random assignment.
in both studies, the central variables in the analyses are the ethnic composition o f the city, the range of vision de ning the size of immediate neighbourhoods andpreferences for co ethnic contact . laurie and jaggi characterise these as the interest ing, essential and dominant independent vari ables in this model . laurieand jaggi set the city ethnic composition 1896 mark fossett and warren waren  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from to 50 per cent black in all of their analyses.6they offer several reasons for this choice. they state that the model has been intentionally kept symmetrical between the two races to further the study s goal of under standing the effect of vision and because it is the prototypical case and hasbeen the focus of much earlier work . finally, they suggest that they chosethis value to concentrate on the worst case scenario . for purposes of replicating laurie and jaggi, we also set the city ethnic mix to 50 50. in later analyses, we vary ethnic mix. we do so for threereasons to highlight the fact that it is a crucialfactor conditioning the impact preferences forco ethnic contact have on segregation out comes because imbalanced ethnic ratios aretypical in real cities and to show that the 50 50 ethnic mix, far from being the worstcase scenario, is optimal for obtaining stable integration.
laurie and jaggi specify immediate neighbourhoods based on the value of r.
 r neighbourhoods are site centred regions consisting of the housing units that can be reached by travelling rspaces by cardinal moves from a chosen point. these neighbour hoods assume the form of diamond shaped areas where the vertices of the diamondsextend out runits from the focal housing unit on the points of the compass. for thepurposes of this paper, we also implementsite centred neighbourhoods in this way.
7 the approach yields neighbourhoods that are very small when ris 1 and that rapidly increase in size as rincreases. we also implement vision using bounded areas , neighbourhoods with xed boundaries, and nd that results obtained using this speci ca tion are similar to those obtained usinglarge r site centred neighbourhoods.
laurie and jaggi specify an agent s preference for co ethnic contact as the minimum percentage of same race agents it must nd among the residents of its immediateneighbourhood to be satis ed . in their simu lations, preferences are homogeneous andsymmetrical that is, the value of pis constant within and across ethnic groups. they vary thevalue of pfrom a minimum of 20 per cent to a maximum of 50 per cent. in our initial simu lations replicating laurie and jaggi, we set the simseg model to implement ethnic preferences as they do. in later analyses, we vary theimplementation of preferences in two ways we allow pto vary over a much wider range and we allow p to take different values fordifferent groups.
laurie and jaggi specify a search process that proceeds as follows. an agent is selected at random and it evaluates the ethnic mix in its immediate neighbourhood . if the agent is satis ed it does nothing. if the agent is not satis ed, it attemptsto move by randomly selecting availablehousing units and evaluating them in thesame manner. if the agent discovers an avail able unit with an immediate neighbourhood that would allow it to improve its satisfaction, it moves creating a vacancy at its originlocation. this process continues until a static equilibrium is reached that is, until move ment ceases because no household is able toimprove their satisfaction by moving. thisspeci cation has two characteristics that weconsider in more depth later in the paper.
one is that it has no mechanism of population turnover households are immortal and thusa satis ed household can reside in the samelocation for ever. the other is that households move only to improve satisfaction and, in agiven simulation, may never move from their initially assigned locations.
for purposes of replicating laurie and jaggi, we specify a similar search processusing the simseg model. during a period ofactivity termed a cycle , households areselected at random and given the opportunityto evaluate their immediate neighbourhoodand compare it with the immediate neighbour hoods for a set of a dozen vacant housing unitsselected at random. the household will move if it discovers a vacant housing unit that is more satisfying . if more than one of theevaluated units is more satisfying, the house hold will move to the one that is most satis fying. the evaluation process continues untila number equalling 25 per cent of all house holds have been given the opportunity toethnic preferences and residential segregation 1897  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from move. this ends the cycle . the process is repeated for a suf cient number of cycles toestablish a static equilibrium.
8 in the analyses featured in this study, we use a modi ed version of this searchprocess. the modi cation is simple house holds are required to move the rst timethey are selected for search even if thehousing options they encounter are less satis fying than their initially assigned location.this rule ensures that every household will move at least once during the simulation experiment and thus at the end of the simu lation all households will reside in a locationthey identi ed and selected through search.
9 the modi cation is simple but, as we showbelow, has important consequences for segre gation outcomes.
replicating laurie and jaggi the previous section noted many points of similarity between the laurie and jaggimodel and the simseg model and alsoseveral differences. simseg s implementationof the city landscape corresponds moreclosely with real urban form, while laurieand jaggi s landscape hews closely to stylisedforms used in agent based modelling. likewise, the measurement of segregation in simseg follows conventions in the demo graphic research literature on residential seg regation while laurie and jaggi use the lesswell known s . in this section of the paper, we demonstrate that these differences do notappear to be consequential for our ability toreplicate laurie and jaggi s central ndings using the simseg model.
figure 1 presents the results of three representative simulation experiments that replicate the rst set of results in laurie andjaggi s study. panel 1 shows the unsurprisingresult that when households have no prefer ences for co ethnic contact, segregation doesnot emerge.
10panel 2 shows that, when households seek 50 per cent co ethniccontact and vision is speci ed to the verylow value of r 1, the experiment produces what laurie and jaggi term small domain segregation characterised by dendriticregions of ethnic homogeneity. panel 3shows that, if vision is changed to the highervalue of r 5, it produces a much higher level of segregation with extensive ghettos . these results correspondclosely with results laurie and jaggi present . there is no indication here that our representation of the city land scape or our use of a modi ed searchprocess causes results generated by thesimseg model to differ in any importantway from those reported by laurie and jaggi.
figure 2 presents nal landscapes from representative simulation experiments replicating the analyses that laurie and jaggi present . these analysesexplore how preferences for co ethniccontact interact with vision in their model.in all simulations, the initial landscape is characterised by segregation near 0.0. the results in column 1show that, when households have low prefer ences for co ethnic contact , the level of segregation in the ending landscapedeclines as vision increases from r 1t o r 3t o r 5. furthermore, when vision reaches r 5, the ending landscape has extremely low segregation. in contrast, theresults in column 2 show that, when prefer ences for co ethnic contact are set at a moder ate level , the level of segregation in the ending landscape increases as vision increases and stands at a very high levelwhen vision reaches r 5.
note that the simulations presented in figures 1 and 2 use our modi cation of thelaurie and jaggi search process. in anexpanded version of this paper , we also present results ofsimulations using laurie and jaggi s searchrule. in the interests of economy of presen tation, we omit these and many other results replicating laurie and jaggi s analyses and limit our discussion to the results we view ascentral to their substantive conclusions.
laurie and jaggi interpret their  nding of an interaction between vision andpreferences results as lending theoreticalsupport to two speci c policy initiatives forreducing segregation one is to increase  vision by improving the availability and the ow of housing market information andthe other is to encourage reductions in prefer ences for co ethnic contact that would makehome seekers more willing to consideralternative neighbourhoods where their ownrace is not concentrated . we do not strictly disagree with laurie and jaggi s ndings or with their general policy recommendations. however,we argue that they should be quali ed andplaced in broader context.
we view their rst policy recommendation as largely moot since households routinelyuse non minimal vision in making locationdecisions. for example, households take account of the ethnic mix of sub divisions, school districts, suburbs and a variety ofother moderate to large scale bounded andsite centred areas. we know of no basis forassuming otherwise.
regarding the second policy recommendation, we go on to show that laurie and jaggiseriously underestimate the segregationpromoting potential of preferences and thus the magnitude of the social change needed toeliminate the impact of preferences forco ethnic contact on segregation. we establishthese and other points by exploring variationsof the laurie and jaggi model. our analyseslead us to conclude that laurie and jaggi scentral ndings and the interpretations they assign to them must be quali ed in two important respects. one is that, when speci cations of vision and search move awayfrom idiosyncratic implementations used inthe literature on agent based modelling andtowards forms consonant with substantivetheory and research on residential segregation, figure 2. ending landscapes from simulations replicating laurie and jaggi s analyses investigating the interaction of preferences for co ethnic contact and vision.ethnic preferences and residential segregation 1899  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from the impact of preferences on segregation becomes stronger and more robust and inter actions involving vision take on much less importance.
the other needed quali cation we identify is that, when ethnic demography is varied to include values typical in real cities, it produceshigher levels of segregation than laurie andjaggi suggest because they overlook animportant fact ethnic demography conditionsthe impact of preferences on segregation and causes the 50 50 ethnic mix they use in their simulations to yield the most optimistic results possible for integration.
commentary and critique of laurie and jaggi s model speci cations researchers drawing on simulation methods must make many choices. one option is tostrive for realism to enhance the ability to draw implications for empirical systems.
laurie and jaggi follow an alternative strategyof making small changes to a simple but wellunderstood model. they are clear about whythey do so it ensures that their model issimilar to those used in previous studies inthe literature on agent based simulations.the bene t of this is that it makes clear what effects are produced by manipulating  vision . in this regard, laurie and jaggi schoices are reasonable and their conclusionsabout the consequences of varying vision aresound in the context of the speci c models they investigate. however, laurie and jaggi do not limit their discussion of the conse quences of varying vision to the context of the stylised models found in the literature on agent based simulations. they explicitlysuggest that their results have broader rel evance for understanding residential segre gation in real urban systems. when they doso, it leaves them open to criticism regardingwhether their model speci cation choices arewell suited for the purpose of investigating residential segregation dynamics.
we note that laurie and jaggi, like most researchers who have used agent based models to explore segregation, are not special ists in segregation. their study is not anchoredin substantive theory and research on residen tial segregation, but rather in previousresearch using agent based models.
11accordingly, they give more attention to how theirmodel compares with previous agent basedmodels and less attention to issues concerningthe relevance their model may have for resi dential segregation. consider for example,laurie and jaggi s rationale for implementingthe city landscape as a torus . they defendthis choice by stating that their goal is to understand the consequences of varying vision while minimising computational arte facts . buttheir choice of the torus only makes sense if computational artefacts are identi ed interms of departures from previous researchusing agent based models not in terms ofmaximising model relevance for residential segregation. if edge effects are in some way important for segregation outcomes,adopting the torus landscape may wellreduce the relevance of the model for understanding segregation in real cities since theyhave edges .
happily, we do not nd any evidence that this particular choice is crucial to the relationships that interest us.
12but our point about the general orientation of their study stands as we can offer similar comments regarding theirchoices to implement a 50 50 ethnic mix  de nitions of neighbourhood that are verysmall and do not consider bounded areas and a search process where households canoccupy the same housing unit forever, in some cases without ever moving based on search. these choices are not stronglygrounded in the broader literature on residen tial segregation but instead follow practices inthe literature on agent based models.
we do not necessarily object to laurie and jaggi s model speci cation choices so long as they place their model generated results in proper perspective. thus, we do not criticise their ndings regarding the complex interaction of vision and preferences for co ethnic contact . we can replicate these  ndings and note below that we believe theymay be relevant to understanding segregationdynamics in certain situations speci cally,1900 mark fossett and warren waren  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from situations that are short in duration and involve only local spatial scales. we grow concerned, however, when laurie and jaggi offer their analyses as a basis for understanding patterns ofresidential segregation. in our view, the model settings they investigate limit theirability to speak to this subject. indeed, theirmodel speci cation choices obscure some of the schelling model s most important impli cations for residential segregation. for example, in the real world, cities have imbalanced ethnic mixes, population turnover is continuous and non minimal neighbourhoods arerelevant to location decisions. we now go onto show that model speci cations crafted tore ect these patterns generate results thateither diminish the relevance of laurie andjaggi s central ndings or contradict themaltogether by providing strong support for the view that moderate preferences for co ethnic contact can produce high levels of segregationunder a wide range of substantively plausibleconditions.
observations on the laurie and jaggi search and movement process the search and movement process in laurie and jaggi s model drives the city landscape to a static equilibrium where all household movement has ceased. the residential distri bution freezes for eternity for two reasons households move only when they can improve their satisfaction and householdsare immortal and, if satis ed, can occupythe same residence for ever. this differs signi cantly from real residential systems which have continuous residential turnover and movement resulting from demographicprocesses of migration and household life cycle dynamics. the absence of these basicpopulation dynamics attenuates the creationofrandom vacancies in the laurie and jaggi model and suppresses movement. conse quently, their search process can generate  equilibrium residential patterns that are idiosyncratic and misleading with regard tosegregation dynamics.
this can be seen by considering what happens when the laurie and jaggi model isrun for a city with a 50 50 ethnic mix, with vision set to r 7 and with preferences for co ethnic contact set to 0 . since households move only to improve their satis faction and all are satis ed at initialisation,no residential movement will occur. theinitial city landscape and the nal city land scape will be one and the same because thecity is in static equilibrium at initialisation.super cially, the result is consistent withlaurie and jaggi s conclusion that weak preferences for co ethnic contact are compatible with integration. however, their model also implies that weak preferences are compatiblewith complete segregation. to see this, make one change to the above simulation initialisethe city landscape to be segregated rather thanintegrated by packing all households from onegroup into a single, circular ghetto at the centre of the landscape.
13under the laurie and jaggi search process, no residential movement will occur. no household can improveits satisfaction by moving and the city willremain unchanged and perfectly segregated thus, preferences that obviously wouldpermit complete integration to emerge underregular population movement will not be registered by the laurie and jaggi model.
this shows that laurie and jaggi s basis for optimism about the possibilities for integration under regimes of modest preferences forco ethnic contact is tied in a crucial way tothe initial conditions of their model. undertheir speci cation of residential search andmovement, integration thrives under modest preferences for co ethnic contact only if the city is initially integrated. their model provides no basis for optimism about the possibilities for reducing segregation in real cities.
on the contrary, a literal interpretation of theimplications of the laurie and jaggi modelsuggests that pre existing segregation would not decline even if preferences for co ethnic contact were eliminated entirely. we do not take this implication of their model as a mean ingful basis for understanding segregation inreal cities. we note it only to show that thelaurie and jaggi search process is not a goodchoice for exploring segregation dynamics. amodel that implies that segregation is anethnic preferences and residential segregation 1901  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from equilibrium state when all households are indifferent from neighbourhood ethnic mix is unsa tisfactory. segregation in such a situation is inherently unstable and will give way to integration if any demographic process is operatingto produce household movement. we believethat a satisfactory model of segregationdynamics should be capable of revealingthis fact.
the simseg model meets this requirement by implementing alternative search processes.
as a general rule, we prefer a search process that represents demographic dynamics thatproduce the continuous population turnoverand random vacancies seen in real residentialsystems.
14for the purposes of this paper, however, we introduce only a small modi cation to the laurie and jaggi searchprocess. speci cally, we require only that households move the rst time they are selected for search. after their initial move,the households are then guided by the originallogic of the laurie and jaggi search processand move again only to increase satisfaction.under this process, the city landscape willmove towards a static equilibrium in whichmovement ceases.
this alternative process has important implications for segregation patterns inmany situations. consider, for instance, thesituation described above where householdsare indifferent from neighbourhood ethnicmix and the city is initialised as perfectly segregated. under the original laurie and jaggi process, the city is in static equilibrium at initialisation and no households move. under our process, every householdmoves once and the city undergoes a rapidand complete transition from segregated tointegrated.
15under our search process, a household searching for the rst time ran domly surveys available vacancies and takesthe rst one it nds since all ethnic mixtures will be satisfying . since moves are random with respect to ethnic mix, the process isstrongly integration promoting. movementceases when all households have beenselected for search at least once. the nalcity landscape is integrated and, in contrastto laurie and jaggi s model, the naldistribution of households is determined bypreference guided search, not initial assign ment by an outside entity. this modi ed search procedure yields a substantively sensible outcome in this situation and, as noted earlier,we can replicate laurie and jaggi s central ndings using this search procedure.
16thus, we conclude that it is a superior alternativefor investigating the impact of preferenceson residential segregation.
implications of the relevance of nonminimal neighbourhoods laurie and jaggi s ndings about non simple segregation behaviour deriving from the inter action of vision and ethnic preferences applyonly in the restricted parameter space whereagents consider ethnic mix in only small, immediate neighbourhoods. a fundamentalcondition must be met for this model parameterisation to have practical relevance for residential segregation it must be plausible to assume that households consider ethnicmix only in relation to minimal, immediate neighbourhoods . laurie and jaggi do not stress this point. they also do not provideany basis for assuming that real householdswill restrict their vision in this way when taking account of ethnic concerns in residential decisions. in our view, this possibility isimplausible. casual and systematic observationalike suggest that households are sensitive tothe ethnic mix of a variety of non minimalneighbourhood contexts including boundedareas such as city blocks, apartment com plexes, sub divisions, school districts and suburbs. we know of no accepted basis for viewing non minimal neighbourhoods as irre levant for residential location decisions andnote that schelling s paper, whichserves as a signi cant point of departure forthe laurie and jaggi study, gives boundedneighbourhoods extended treatment.
on this basis, we conclude that the interaction between vision and preferences docu mented in laurie and jaggi s study has littlerelevance for residential segregation. note that this conclusion stands even if the ethnicmix of minimal, immediate neighbourhoods1902 mark fossett and warren waren  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from issalient in residential decisions. residential decisions may involve considerations of ethnic mix in both small andlarge neighbourhoods there is no need to portray the issue asinvolving an either or choice. but thesegregation behaviour laurie and jaggi docu ment under conditions of minimal vision ismanifest only when non minimal neighbourhoods are strictly irrelevant.
we hasten to note that this does not mean that laurie and jaggi s careful analysis of how segregation behaviour varies when vision is restricted to small immediate neigh bourhoods is without value. indeed, webelieve their work may be relevant for under standing segregation in small, short durationsituations such as seating patterns in auditor iums and school lunch rooms and conversa tion groups at social gatherings. the key is that it may be plausible in these situations to assume that non minimal neighbourhoodsare strictly irrelevant.
the interaction of preferences and ethnic demography the previous section outlines our basis for concluding that, for residential segregation,the most important interaction in the laurie and jaggi model is notthe interaction of vision and preferences. this section outlines our basis for a second conclusion the mostimportant interaction in agent based segre gation models is one that laurie and jaggido not consider at all it is the interactionbetween ethnic demography and preferences.
schelling pointed out that the impact of preferences on segregation is con ditioned by ethnic demography, but laurieand jaggi hold ethnic demography constant intheir simulations. they characterise the 50 50 mix they use in their simulations as a worst case scenario for achieving integration.
17in fact, this ethnic mix is optimal. to see this, assume that perfect integration is achieved by strategically arranging households to ensure that ethnic mix is uniform throughout the citylandscape. in this situation, all householdswill experience the same ethnic mix. since allhouseholds in the laurie and jaggi simulationsare assigned the same preference for co ethniccontact , universal satisfaction results when pis compatible with the ethnic mix of the city.
speci cally, universal satisfaction occurs whenp c20minc, c138 .
18the highest level of pthat is compatible with universal satisfaction under integration is determined by the value ofmin c, . this reaches its maximum value of 50 when the ethnic mix is 50 50.
based on this, the 50 50 city is hardly a  worst case it can sustain universal satisfaction with integration at higher levels of p than any other ethnic mix. this is a nding schelling speci cally noted . in contrast, consider a 90 10 ethnic mix which is not uncommon in realcities. integration in a city with this ethnicmix can be universally satisfying only whenpreferences for co ethnic contact are within the range of 0 10 per cent. if desired co ethnic contact rises above 10 per cent, allhouseholds in the smaller group will be dissa tis ed under integration. for example, if pis set at 50 in this city, there would be consider able latent potential for segregation to emerge since all members of the smaller group wouldbe 40 points shy of attaining their preferred level of co ethnic contact.
in the laurie and jaggi model, dissatisfaction occurs when co ethnic representation falls short of preferred co ethnic presenceand it increases monotonically as the discre pancy increases. consequently, integrationproduces dissatisfaction for all members of agroup when the group s population percentage falls below their desired level of co ethnic contact and the level of the dissatisfactionwill vary directly with the magnitude of thediscrepancy. guided by the assumption thatintegration is less stable when it produceshigher levels of dissatisfaction, we advancetwo hypotheses regarding segregation beha viour in agent based models where groups hold symmetrical, homogeneous preferences, as they do in the laurie and jaggi study, andwhere households consider ethnic mix innon minimal neighbourhoods.
h1. segregation is likely to emerge whenthe relative size of any group falls belowethnic preferences and residential segregation 1903  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from the prevailing preference for co ethnic contact.
h2. the level of segregation should vary directly with the size of the discrepancy between the demand for co ethnic contact and the demographic supply ofco ethnic neighbours under conditions ofintegration.
we present evidence supporting these hypoth eses below. before introducing these results,however, we rst point out that these hypoth eses cannot be adequately tested using the laurie and jaggi model because it can produce pathological results in simulationswhere city ethnic mix departs from 50 50.
we discuss this point at length in an expandedversion of this paper . in the interests of space, we presentonly a brief summary here.
in a nutshell, the laurie and jaggi model is unsatisfactory because it can yield integrationas an equilibrium outcome even when thereis widespread dissatisfaction with neighbour hood ethnic mix and tremendous latent potential for segregation producing move ment. the problem traces to the fact that thelaurie and jaggi model provides inadequateopportunities for households to act on their residential preferences. schelling noted that fair freedom of movement is crucial to expression of segregation poten tial in simulations of the sort laurie andjaggi explore. the key to this is the avail ability of vacancies which would give house holds the opportunity to act on theirpreferences. schelling recommended using a vacancy rate of 25 30 per cent to ensure this. laurie and jaggi implement a muchlower vacancy rate of 10 per cent andprovide no alternative mechanism for generat ing vacancies that would permit households toexercise choice. as a result, their model shortcircuits segregation promoting residentialmovement in a way that schelling speci cally warned against.
the nature of the pathology can be outlined with a simple example. consider a simulation with the following characteristics ethnicmix is set at 90 10,pis set at 50 , the vacancy rate is set at 10 per centand vision is set at 5 which yields neighbourhoods containing 60 housing units.under initial random assignment, each neigh bourhood will, on average, have 6 vacanciesand 54 occupied units. of the occupiedhousing units, 48 49 will be occupied byhouseholds from the larger ethnic group and5 6 will be occupied by households fromthe smaller ethnic group.
households from the larger ethnic group are all satis ed they will not move unless the neigh bourhood ethnic mix changes dramatically.households from the smaller ethnic groupare all dissatis ed they are motivated tomove to neighbourhoods where their groupis better represented. random variation in neighbourhood ethnic mix will create neighbourhoods that depart slightly from the 90  10 ratio. households from the smaller groupwill systematically move to neighbourhoodswhere their group s representation is greater.but movement will quickly cease. thereason is simple. neighbourhoods have onlya few vacancies , so the destination neighbourhoods quickly ll up with households from the smaller group . at that point,all movement ceases. neighbourhoodsgaining population will have an ethnic mixaround 80 20 and no vacancies neighbourhoods losing population will have an ethnicmix of 100 0 and 20 per cent vacancies. no neighbourhood will have an ethnic mix thatwill satisfy households from the smallerethnic group. thus, all households from thesmaller group will be dissatis ed, but theycannot move due to the absence of vacanciesin the neighbourhoods they prefer. a staticequilibrium obtains with low levels ofsegregation.
19 this is a pathological outcome because it is obvious that the residential pattern is inher ently unstable. considerable latent potentialfor segregation exists , but it is not expressed becausemovement is arti cially restricted by the1904 mark fossett and warren waren  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from scarcity of vacancies. this limits the relevance of the laurie and jaggi searchmodel for residential segregation. in real residential systems, households are not immortaland eternally immobile as households fromthe larger ethnic group are in the aboveexample. on the contrary, basic demographicprocesses such as migration and householdlife cycle dynamics generate steady popu lation turnover wherein some householdsexit the population and are replaced by new households. signi cantly, these demographic processes produce regular random vacancies in all areas of the city. the occurrence of such vacancies is all that is needed to unleash the latent potential for segregationin the situation just described.
accordingly, simulation models of schelling segregation dynamics must adopt one of two practices. they must hew closely to schelling and implement vacancy rates suf cient topermit preferences to be exercised or, theymust provide a mechanism for the creationof vacancies that will accomplish the sameobjective. laurie and jaggi s model is unsatis factory in this regard. the simple modi cationwe introduce to the laurie and jaggi search algorithm is suf cient to unleash the latent potential for segregation in the situationdescribed above. the modi cation requiresall households to move on rst search so thatthey will ultimately reside in a location theychose through search .this creates vacancies throughout the citywhich in turn provide opportunities for households to act on their ethnic preferences.
signi cantly, it leads to a fundamentallydifferent equilibrium landscape characterisedby high levels of segregation.
in our view, the laurie and jaggi search process is inadequate for investigating thedynamics of residential segregation. it assumes away basic demographic events which are ubiquitous in real cities and which can be demonstrated to play an importantrole in segregation dynamics.
20households move for a host of reasons unrelated toethnic concerns and thus allneighbourhoods experience regular, on going population turn over. research on ethnic successionestablishes that this plays a crucial role inneighbourhood ethnic transitions neighbour hoods undergo succession in large part because they lose their ability to ll regularly occurring vacancies with new entrants whoreproduce the social characteristics of thehouseholds who are exiting.
in fairness to laurie and jaggi, we stress that our objection to their model centres onthe crucial issue of whether it is adequate formodelling segregation dynamics in residential systems. we believe it is not. however, it maybe entirely appropriate for modelling segre gation in other situations. for example,seating patterns in a high school cafeteria ora basketball gymnasium are not necessarilysubject to the regular creation of vacancies.as seats begin to ll up, agents settle intovacancies that offer satisfying ethnic mixes among immediate neighbours. they may also have opportunities to move if theybecome dissatis ed with the ethnic mix oftheir neighbours. however, the seatingarrangement will eventually freeze into astable equilibrium that will not be perturbeduntil the lunch hour or basketball game isover. thus, it is possible that the segregation outcomes we view as implausible for residential systems may be relevant for other socialcontexts.
central analyses we now turn to a more systematic investigation of segregation outcomes undervarying conditions of ethnic demography and speci cations of vision. to begin, figures 3 5 present results from four sets ofsimulation experiments that lend preliminarysupport to our hypotheses. preferences forco ethnic contact are xed at a low level of30 per cent in all four sets of experiments.within each set, the ethnic mix of the city isvaried from 90 10 to 75 25 to 65 35 to 50  50. each of the four sets implements a differ ent speci cation of vision. the search processin all of the simulations is our modi edversion of the laurie and jaggi algorithmthat requires households to move on rstethnic preferences and residential segregation 1905  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from search and thereafter only to improve satisfaction.
we begin by considering the results obtained when vision is speci ed in terms ofsite centred, immediate neighbourhoodswhere vision is set to r 5. experiments based on this speci cation are presented infigure 3. the pattern is straightforward thelevel of segregation is a function of the discre pancy between ethnic demography and prefer ences. thus, the highest level of segregation is seen when the ethnic mix is 90 10  and segregation declines steadily as the ethnic mix moves closer to 50 50 .
this is exactly the pattern predicted by ourhypothesis.
figure 4 presents a set of experiments that implement a variant of vision where house holds evaluate housing choices based not on ethnic mix for site centred immediate neighbourhoods, but on ethnic mix within bounded areas. we view this implementationof vision as interesting for substantivereasons reviewed earlier and note thatschelling explicitly recognised therelevance of bounded areas in his writingson segregation dynamics. one impact ofimplementing vision in this way is thatethnic settlement patterns tend to follow the borders of bounded areas and thus area toarea transitions in ethnic mix are sometimesabrupt. this kind of pattern is not uncommonin real cities where ethnic mix sometimeschanges abruptly with sub division or schooldistrict boundaries. signi cantly, the ndingsfor segregation obtained using this implemen tation of vision correspond closely with those obtained using laurie and jaggi s implementation of vision . values of d are higher using the bounded area implemen tation of vision, but only because we calculatedfrom these very same xed areas. the central pattern is the same segregationlevels decline as city ethnic mix declinesfrom 90 10 to 50 50.
the results for the experiments shown in figure 5 also manifest this pattern. theseexperiments use a variation in the implemen tation of vision where households evaluatehousing choices based on both the ethnic com position of bounded areas and of adjacent bounded areas.
21this implementation of figure 4. ending landscapes from analyses where ethnic mix is varied with preferences for co ethnic contact set at 30 per cent and vision uses bounded areas.
figure 3. ending landscapes from analyses where ethnic mix is varied with preferences for co ethnic contact set at 30 per cent and vision set atr 5.1906 mark fossett and warren waren  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from vision produces the highest levels of segregation seen in these gures. it also producesstrong patterns of clustering not unlike thoseseen in many cities.
the results in figures 3 5 support a clear  nding when vision involves moderate to large spatial domains, segregation takeson high values whenever demand forco ethnic contact exceeds the demographic supply . implementing vision as site centred, immediate neighbourhoods with amoderate rsetting of 5 produces slightly lower levels of segregation and clear patternsof clustering.
22vision implemented in terms of bounded areas produces intermediatelevels of segregation, but with chequer boarding instead of clustering.
23implementing vision in terms of both bounded areasand adjacent bounded areas produces asimilar pattern with higher levels of segregation and pronounced patterns of clustering.
the variations across these three speci cations suggest that the impact of vision differs when bounding is involved. boundingrefers to whether vision follows isolated xed regions or is site centred. this aspectof vision has implications for the dimensionof segregation known as clustering. implementing vision based on site centred areas with r 5 produces clustering in the simulations shown in figure 3 as regions ofethnic homogeneity grow and connect toeach other. in figure 4, strict bounding, thelimitation of vision to single bounded areas,produces visual evidence of chequering , apattern where ethnic mix of adjacent bounded areas is uncorrelated. in figure 5, implementing vision based on the hybrid com bination of the bounded area andits adjacent bounded areas produces especially strongpatterns of clustering. the principle appearsto be that clustering emerges when vision issite centred in some respect.
24 in the simulations presented here, uneven distribution and clustering are most pro nounced when vision is based on boundedareas and adjacent bounded areas. but, thisis primarily due to the fact that the ring ofadjacent bounded areas covers a largeexpanse of up to 392 housing units. visioninvolving site centred areas of this scaleproduces especially high levels of segregation when preferences are segregation promoting . thus, for example, in simulations not reported here, we found thatequally high levels of uneven distributionand clustering were produced when visionwas implemented using site centred neigh bourhoods delimited by large values of r .
25this points to the need to modify laurie and jaggi s ndingsregarding the interaction of vision and segre gation. they correctly nd that moving fromminimal to moderate scale vision helps toretard segregation when preferences are com patible with integration. but movement frommoderate to wide scale vision produces higher segregation when preferences are segregation promoting.
the results shown in figure 6 are based on experiments where vision is implemented asthe minimal, four unit, von neumann neigh bourhood . they document a pattern that runs counter to the results obtained figure 5. ending landscapes from analyses where ethnic mix is varied with preferences for co ethnic contact set at 30 per cent and vision uses bounded areas and adjacent areas.ethnic preferences and residential segregation 1907  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from using the three previous speci cations for vision. when vision is speci ed this way,our hypotheses are not supported. as theexample landscapes show, segregationchanges little as city ethnic mix moves from90 10 to 50 50.
the vision implemented in these simulations is the minimum that can be speci edand, in our view, should be seen as a specialcase.
26as laurie and jaggi note, this setting for vision tends to produce small domainsegregation that forms a dendritic patternwith snaking ribbons of ethnic homogeneityrunning randomly through the bounded areas of the simseg city landscape. this  small domain segregation tends not to regis ter at a high level when segregation ismeasured by computing the index of dissimi larity from data for bounded areas. theribbons of darkly shaded households for thesmaller group tend to increase in length,width and overall coverage as ethnic mix moves from 90 10 towards 50 50.
this is an unsurprising function of the changing demography of the city, but it warrants mention because it accounts for thefact that the segregation scores are slightlyhigher when the ethnic mix is 90 10 compared with other ethnic mixes. in the 90 10 case, the availability of households from the smaller group is low and the ribbons that arise are spread further apart in space and,due to the less extensive coverage, are lesslikely to join into long sections over thecourse of the simulation experiment.because their average length is shorter, theyare less likely to cross area boundaries anddcomputed for xed neighbourhoods is slightly higher.
table 1 summarises the dissimilarity scores for the experiments just reviewed. it alsoincludes dissimilarity scores for severaladditional experiment sets we prepared tocover all ethnic mix combinations on ve point intervals from 95 5t o5 0 50. these data lend further support to our hypotheses.
when vision involves non minimal spatial domains, ethnic demography conditions theimpact of preferences on segregation suchthat high levels of segregation emerge whenpreferences for co ethnic contact equal orexceed the smaller group s percentage in thepopulation and the level of segregationincreases with the magnitude of the discrepancy. signi cantly, this pattern is seen whether vision is implemented using site centred areas, as in the laurie and jaggistudy, or using the variations involvingbounded areas.
table 1 also documents an interaction between ethnic demography and segregationwhen vision is implemented as the minimal, small rformulation . but we do not view this as support for our hypotheses.
instead, as we suggested previously, webelieve it should be seen as an artefact of thefact that, when segregation is computed from xed area data, small segregation patternstend to register better when ethnic mix is low.
the patterns seen in table 1 are documented more systematically in figure 7. this gure plots the index of dissimilarity fromthe nal city landscapes of 1200 separatesimulation experiments by the smallergroup s percentage representation in the citypopulation. each graph in the gure depictsthe results from 300 experiments conducted figure 6. ending landscapes from analyses where ethnic mix is varied with preferences for co ethnic contact set at 30 per cent and vision set at r 1.1908 mark fossett and warren waren  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from implementing the four versions of vision used in the experiments reported in figures 3 6and table 1. in each of these simulations,the preference for co ethnic contact is set at30 per cent and the size of the smaller group in the population is randomly varied from 5 to 50. the three graphs for non minimalvision all show that the impact of preferencesfor co ethnic contact for segregation arestrongly conditioned by ethnic demographyand in a manner consistent with ourhypotheses. segregation is low when ethnicpreferences can be easily satis ed under integration . but when demand for co ethniccontact exceeds supply under integrationtable 1. scores for the index of dissimilarity for the simulations shown in figures 3 6 plus scores for additional experiments ethnic demographymoderate to large domain vision site centredvision r 1site centred vision r 5bounded area onlybounded area  adjacent region 95 5 mix 43 79 86 88 90 10 mix 30 74 85 89 85 15 mix 22 73 82 86 80 20 mix 24 68 84 87 75 25 mix 20 62 81 94 70 30 mix 20 60 67 96 65 35 mix 20 34 42 61 60 40 mix 21 22 14 35 55 45 mix 19 9 7 8 50 50 mix 20 3 4 5 figure 7. index of dissimilarity by the smaller group s percentage representation in the city population under four implementations of vision with preferences for co ethnic contact at 30 per cent.ethnic preferences and residential segregation 1909  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from , segregation emerges. the discrepancy betweendemand and supply increases moving from right to left on the graphs. as predicted by our hypotheses, segregation moves to highlevels as this discrepancy increases.
two interesting patterns are evident in figure 7. one is that, once demand forco ethnic contact approaches and exceedssupply, segregation climbs rapidly to highlevels. the transition is less abrupt than a step function, but the effect involves a region of rapid increase leading into a plateau where segregation is at consistent highlevels. another pattern is that segregationbegins to elevate well before demand exceeds supply. thus, as documented intable 1 as well as in figure 7, a high level of segregation is generated under the 65 35 ethnic mix even though the percentage representation of the smaller group is a full5 points above the relatively low preference for 30 per cent co ethnic contact.
fossett and waren provides insight into this result. they report that segregationoutcomes in agent based models are consistently higher than outcomes that can be achieved under planning and strategic place ment. under strategic placement, the 65 35 ethnic mix could easily sustain stable inte gration where all households are satis ed.however, in the simulations here, the initialhousehold placements are random and manyhouseholds are unsatis ed and move to achieve the co ethnic contact they desire.
their moves are unco ordinated, not strategic.stable integration is logically possible, but themoves of individual households producesteady drift towards ethnically polarisedneighbourhoods and stable segregation.
fossett has termed the powerful interaction of preferences and ethnic demography documented in table 1 and figure 9, the paradox of weak minoritypreferences . the essence of the paradox isthat relatively weak preferences for co ethniccontact can produce high levels of segregationwhen population groups are small. ofcourse, the broader principle involved is notparadoxical. if demand for co ethnic contactcannot be met under integration, goal directedmoves by individual households will create a drift towards segregation that is selfreinforcing and unlikely to be reversed.when the preferences for co ethnic contactare very high, this is unsurprising. but, it isnot widely appreciated that the effect can bestrong when relatively weak preferencescombine with unbalanced ethnic ratios. sincesuch demographic conditions are typical, not rare, the paradox takes on particular substantive signi cance.
varying preferences for co ethnic contact across groups the results to this point are consistent with a simple principle segregation outcomesunder voluntary choice by individual house holds are determined not by the absolute magnitude of the preference for co ethnic contact, but by the discrepancy between the preferences individuals hold and the demo graphic supply that can satisfy these prefer ences under conditions of integration . we explored this hypoth esis in greater depth by performing severalthousand experiments setting the simseg model to implement vision based on sitecentred areas de ned by r 5 and using our speci cation for search. for these exper iments, we sample the parameter space forthe model as follows. we randomly varywhites preferences for co ethnic contactfrom 0 to 90 we randomly vary blacks preferences for co ethnic contact from 0 to 90 we randomly vary rfrom 1 to 7 and we randomly vary city ethnic mix from 95 5t o 5 95.
for each simulation experiment, we computed the maximum discrepancy between anethnic group s supply and its percentage inthe population. we then categorised thisvariable into ve unit intervals and plotted the distribution of scores on the index of dissimilarity as shown in figure 8.
27the results provide strong support for our hypoth esis. the level of segregation resulting isalways high when the co ethnic preferences1910 mark fossett and warren waren  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from of at least one group equal or exceed the supply available in integrated neighbour hoods. as seen earlier in figure 7, the levelof segregation is distinctly elevated when the balance between supply and demand is merely tight . for example, in simulationswhere there is a surplus of supply but it is 5points or less, the median value of the indexof dissimilarity is about 50. under these con ditions, perfect integration is clearly feasibleunder planning and strategic placement, butit does not emerge under the unco ordinated location decisions of individual households despite the fact that the city landscape isinitially integrated. it is not until supplyexceeds demand by a full 10 points that segre gation levels fall away to levels that would beexpected under random assignment  two outcomes in the parameter space for the model merit comment. one is that simulations with low levels of preference for co ethnic contact for both groups producedhigh levels of segregation in cities with imbal anced ethnic mixes. this provides very strongsupport for the schelling notion that highlevels of segregation can emerge even whenlocation decisions are not speci cally motiv ated by the desire to live in ethnically homogeneous areas.
28the other is that simulations where one group held a strong preference for co ethnic contact sometimes produced low levels of segregation in citieswith imbalanced ethnic mixes. this resultoccurs when the group holding the strongpreference for co ethnic contact is a demo graphic majority andthe other group holds a low preference for co ethnic contact. forexample, segregation will be low in citieswith an 80 20 ethnic mix, if the larger group s preference for co ethnic contact doesnot exceed 70 per cent and the smaller group s preference for co ethnic contact doesnot exceed 10 per cent. the key factor thatpermits stable integration in this situation is that both groups preferences can be easily met under conditions of even distribution.this provides further support for schelling sbasic insight that the implications of prefer ences for segregation are complex andcannot be deduced based on knowledge ofpreferences alone.
positive preferences for diversity a potential basis for optimism laurie and jaggi characterised their study as providing a basis for optimism regardingethnic segregation. they interpreted theirresults as suggesting that policies aimed atexpanding vision and promoting moderatepreferences for co ethnic contact could serveto lower segregation. the results we present here suggest that their optimism must be tempered. laurie and jaggi stated that preferencesneed not be unrealistic or gandhian inorder to achieve integration. but they did nottake account of the interaction of preferencesand ethnic demography and based theirconclusions on results obtained using anethnic mix that was optimal for producing integration. our results show that, even with expanded vision, moderate and weak pre ferences for co ethnic contact can producehigh levels of segregation under ethnic demo graphic conditions that are typical in mostcities.
this is an important and sobering nding.
 realistic reductions in preferences for co ethnic contact may not necessarily be enough to drive existing segregation downand promote stable integration. but we donot believe that this nding implies thatethnic segregation is inevitable. instead, we figure 8. box plot showing distribution of index of dissimilarity by the magnitude of the maximum difference between group supply and group demand for co ethnic contact.ethnic preferences and residential segregation 1911  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from suggest that it means that additional directions in policy options concerning preferences needto be considered. one new direction that deserves attention is the potential role that positive preferences for ethnic diversity may play in reducing ethnic segregation.laurie and jaggi follow the literature onagent based modelling and focus exclusivelyon preferences for co ethnic contact. butresearch on residential preferences indicates that people may simultaneously hold both positive preference for co ethnic contact and positive preferences for contact with othergroups.
29 in the case of ethnic minority groups, this may re ect the mixture of desires to maintainconnection with the ethnic community and atthe same time achieve assimilation with the broader society, including greater contact with ethnic majority groups. the preferenceto seek signi cant levels of out groupcontact may re ect instrumental motives forassimilation such as gaining access to the resi dential amenities available only in majorityethnic areas. alternatively, it may re ect awillingness to relinquish ethnic bonds and seek full incorporation into primary social relationships with the majority group includ ing friendship and kin networks. or it mayre ect some combination of these andother motives. in the case of ethnic majoritygroups, desires for out group contact mayre ect a willingness at least partially toembrace the diversity of ethnic culture in modern societies and especially urban areas and a desire to avoid living an insulated lifein bland , homogeneous, residential areas.
what role might such preferences play in segregation we use the simseg model toimplement simulation scenarios relevant tothis question. first, we elaborate ethnic prefer ences to allow for positive preferences for coethnic contact and positive preferences for out group contact. these must be constrainedto be logically compatible, but otherwise canbe implemented in a straightforward way.for example, if preferences for co ethniccontact are set at 30 per cent, a preferencefor out group contact can be speci ed at anyvalue between 0 and 70 per cent. if it is setto 30 per cent, all households would becompletely satis ed with neighbourhoods that range between 30 and 70 per cent black and all households would be dissatis ed insome degree with neighbourhoods that wereless than 30 per cent black or more than 70per cent black.
figure 9 presents results of experiments exploring the potential role of diversity prefer ences on segregation. ethnic demography here is set to 70 30 and vision is implemented in the four variations used earlier. we implemented the diversity preference in aconservative way. we calculated satisfactionscores on out group contact in the same wayas satisfaction scores on co ethnic contactbut we gave them only half the weight given to the satisfaction scores for co ethnic contact. this corresponds to a situation where households sincerely hold the goal ofseeking diversity, but assign it less importancethan the goal of seeking co ethnic contact.these results suggest that positive preferencesfor ethnic diversity have the potentialto dampen the segregation promoting figure 9. ending landscapes from analyses where vision is varied with preferences for co ethnic contact at 30 per cent, preferences for out groupcontact at 30 per cent, and ethnic mix set to 70 30.1912 mark fossett and warren waren  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from consequences of preferences for co ethnic contact established in previous sections ofthis paper. across the board, segregation is very low. of particular interest, segregation is low in all three scenarios with non minimal vision. as previously reported intable 1, these same three scenarios producedhigh levels of segregation without diversitypreferences. thus, the introduction of positivepreferences for diversity sharply reducedsegregation. this nding, as so many others, is anticipated by schelling .
30 we also performed a second set of experiments using a variation in preferences thatwas even more conservative. speci cally,we departed from laurie and jaggi s practiceof maintaining symmetrical preferences forboth groups and assigned stronger preferences for co ethnic contact to the demographic majority group . we set the prefer ence for co ethnic contact for whites at 50per cent while keeping the similar preferencefor blacks at 30 per cent and maintainingthe preference for out group contact at 30per cent for both groups. thus, whites arenot satis ed if they are a demographic minority, but also wish to live in ethnically diverse areas. the results for these exper iments are shown in figure 10. segregationis low in all four experiments and againsuggests that positive preferences for ethnicdiversity have the potential to dampen thesegregation promoting consequences of pre ferences for co ethnic contact established in previous sections of this paper.
in our view, these results provide a realistic basis for optimism regarding the possibilities for ethnic integration under unconstrainedchoice dynamics. the results are encouragingbecause preferences for out group contact areassigned only half the weight of preferencesfor co ethnic contact. clearly, future research should direct attention to the question of how diversity preferences may serve to reducesegregation.
however, it is important to keep these exploratory results in perspective becausethe simulations implement conditions thatare favourable to integration in two keyrespects. the rst is that neither group spreference for co ethnic contact exceeds itsrepresentation in the population. this makesit possible for white and black households to meet their preferences for co ethnic contact and diversity by residing in areasthat mirror the city s 70 30 ethnic mix. this would not be possible in a city with a 90 10 ethnic mix. future research should investigatethat particular circumstance to assess thelimits of the diversity preference effect seenin figures 9 and 10.
the second way these scenarios specify conditions favourable to integration is byimplementing preferences that depart substan tially from those documented in surveys. inthe case of whites, surveys suggest thatmost white households prefer at least 80 percent co ethnic contact .
there is relatively little evidence to suggestthat the average white household speci callyseeks diversity and assigns this goal a highpriority.
31the more common optimistic  interpretation is that whites tolerate  figure 10. ending landscapes from analyses where vision is varied with preferences for co ethnic contact at 50 per cent for whites and 30 per centfor blacks, preferences for out group contact at 30 per cent and ethnic mix set to 70 30.ethnic preferences and residential segregation 1913  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from diversity and their level of tolerance has increased appreciably over the past fourdecades. but, our earlier results suggested that mere tolerance is not likely to be a powerful mechanism for promoting integration. that is, tolerance of out groupcontact is permissive of greater integration, but it does not speci cally generate movementtowards integration. the models explored here show that, when preferences for co ethniccontact exceed demographic supply under integration, neighbourhoods drift steadily towards ethnic polarisation via irreversibleneighbourhood tipping dynamics of thetype considered by schelling. the resultspresented in table 1 and figure 7 show thatmere tolerance of diversity does not serve asa brake on this dynamic.
we should stress that we are couching our assessment of the relative inconsequenceof tolerance of diversity in the context ofmodels that assess only the direct effects of preferences. in a broader view, the permissiverole of tolerance may be more important.residential choices are driven by non ethnicresidential goals such as seeking bettermunicipal services, higher quality housing and closer proximity to employment all are in uential factors in residential decisions.tolerance of ethnic diversity allows house holds pursuing non ethnic goals to considera wider range of neighbourhood ethnicmixes. thus, while tolerance of diversitymay not directly counter the segregation pro moting effects of preferences for co ethnic contact, it may still facilitate integration indirectly by allowing non ethnic dynamicsto undermine the drift towards segregationseen in pure preference effect models.
our analyses indicate that those who wish topromote integration via preference related interventions should give attention not onlyto reducing desires for co ethnic contact but also to educational efforts that would foster a meaningful desire for ethnic diversity.with respect to majority group preferences,this goal may be within reach in cities withimbalanced ethnic mixtures such as the 90  10 and 75 25 scenarios used in the experiments presented earlier. cities with ethnicmixtures along these lines are not uncommon.surveys suggest that most whites will toler ate neighbourhoods with 90 10 to 75 25 ethnic mixes. if whites actively sought such neighbourhoods with these ethnic mixes, itcould help to promote large reductions in seg regation. considering the signi cant changesin attitudes that have taken place over thepast four decades, it is not altogether unrealis tic to imagine such changes are possible.
this scenario is more complicated, however, because surveys suggest that typical blackhouseholds have preferences for at least 50per cent co ethnic contact. these preferencesare not compatible with stable integration incities with 90 10 or 75 25 ethnic mixes due to the paradox of weak minority preferences.blacks preferences for co ethnic contact aremarkedly lower than those held by whites, but they are not integration promoting relativeto ethnic demographies found in most metropo litan areas. on a more encouraging note,survey evidence suggests that blacks, moreso than whites, often hold positive preferencesfor non trivial diversity. the paradox of weakminority preferences suggests that demo graphic minority groups may bear a disproportionate burden in achieving integration. in most american metropolitan areas, integrationrequires whites to embrace only moderatelevels of out group contact while still beingable to maintain high levels of co ethniccontact. in contrast, minority groups oftenmust seek very high levels of out groupcontact and accept low levels of co ethnic contact, a point noted by schelling . for minorities, spatial assimilationimplies the potential demise of geographicallybased minority ethnic communities in urbanareas. these issues are likely to be importantand complex and thus deserve attention infuture research.
summary and discussion our primary purpose in this paper has been to investigate the implications of a theoreticalmodel of ethnic preference effects on segre gation. as in the laurie and jaggi study, thecrucial variables in the model are ethnic1914 mark fossett and warren waren  at mount allison univ on june 9, 2015 usj.sagepub.com downloaded from demography, ethnic preferences and vision .
laurie and jaggi stressed the interaction ofvision and preferences. we conclude that this interaction may be relevant to understanding segregation found in small, short durationsettings such as lunch room and auditoriumseating. however, we do not see it as import ant to understanding residential segregationsince larger spatial domains are salient in resi dential choices in metropolitan areas and basicdemographic processes generate random vacancies that unleash the full segregationpromoting potential of preferences.
instead, we direct attention towards the interaction of ethnic preferences and ethnicdemography. this interaction is powerfuland in our view has clear relevance for under standing residential segregation in metropoli tan areas. because laurie and jaggi did not recognise this interaction, their study adopted a setting for ethnic demography thatwas optimal for achieving integration. webelieve this helps to account for their prema ture willingness to question the schellingmodel of segregation and offer conclusionsabout ethnic preferences and integration thatwere more optimistic than those advanced by previous researchers. we provide a more nuanced assessment of the implications ofethnic preferences under ethnic mixturescommon in american metropolitan areas.our analyses lead us to be more cautiousabout the possibilities for integration underunconstrained ethnic preferences. we ndsupport for the hypothesis that preferences are segregation promoting when demand for co ethnic contact cannot be satis ed by demo graphic supply under integration. based onthis, we have a more sober view of thechanges that may be needed to achieve dra matic reductions in segregation given prevail ing preferences for co ethnic contact and theethnic demographies of most metropolitan areas.
we are able to end on a more optimistic note by pointing to the role that positive preferences for diversity can potentially play in reducing seg regation. we distinguish diversity preferences from the more passive tolerance of diversity.tolerance of diversity is not inconsequentialand may play an important permissive role insituations where factors other than ethnic con siderations may promote re sidential integration.
but in models that highlight the segregation and integration promoting effects of preferences,positive preferences for d iversity appear to retard directly the segregation promoting effects ofpreferences for co ethnic contact to a muchgreater degree than mere tolerance of diversity.
notes 1. information about the programme can obtained at the senior author s website which can be found at http sociweb.
tamu.edu. a version of simseg geared to undergraduate teaching can be found at the website for amber waves software of lancaster, pennsylvania .
2. laurie and jaggi do not suggest that the substance of their ndings depends in anyimportant way on using the edgeless torusurban form. fossett and dietrich undertake a methodological study investigating the impact of city form and neighbourhood shape on segregation outcomes.they report that results obtained using the edgeless torus form are similar to results obtained using the circular city form.
3. the computing formula is given in laurie and jaggi . the properties of the measure are reviewed in fossett .
4. in simulations with a 50 50 ethnic mix, we found that sand h2had high correlations with d. however, when the ethnic mix departs from 50 50,ds relationships with sandh2turn non linear.
5. the zero order correlations among the measures all exceeded 0.98.
6. while they state that cis restricted to the range 0 0,c c200 5 , cdoes not take any value other than 0.5 in the analysesthey report.
7. fossett and dietrich performed a methodological analysis using a variety of neighbourhood shapes including circles, diamonds and squares. they found that neigh bourhood shape had no effect onsegregation outcomes net of the impact of neighbourhood scale .
8. we run our simulations for 30 cycles. this is an arbitrary number, but it is suf cientlyhigh to ensure that segregation patternsethnic preferences